रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Aid =  राज्जपतन्र 


Che Gazette of Jndia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-04092025-265979 
CG-DL-E-04092025-265979 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग —euvs 3---उप-खण्ड (iii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (iii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 39] नई दिल्ली, बुधवार, सितम्बर 3, 2025/भाद्र 2, 947 
No. 39] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 3, 2025/BHADRA 2, 947 


भारत निर्वाचन आयोग 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


a. अ. 39 (अ).-- लोक प्रतिनिधित्व अधिनियम, 7954 (957 का 43) की धारा 406(क) के अनुसरण में, 
निर्वाचन आयोग ude निर्वाचन याचिका सं. 9/2024 में कर्नाटक उच्च न्यायालय (बेंगलुरु खंडपीठ) का दिनांक 05 
जून, 2025 का निर्णय/आदेश प्रकाशित करता है। 


[सं. 82/केटी-एचपी/9/2024] 


आदेश से, 


पवन दीवान, सचिव 


5905 GI/2025 (4) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 
O. N. 39 (E).—In pursuance of Section l06 (a) of the Representation of the People Act, 95! (43 of 95), 
the Election Commission hereby publishes the judgment/order of the High Court of Karnataka (Bengaluru Bench) 
dated 5" June, 2025 in Election Petition No. 9/2024. 


[No. 82/KT-HP/9/2024] 
By Order, 
PAWAN DIWAN, Secy. 


IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU 
DATED THIS THE 05TH DAY OF JUNE, 2025 
BEFORE 
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE E.S. INDIRESH 
ELECTION PETITOIN NO.9 OF 2024 
BETWEEN: 


SHRI MOHAN KUMARB., 
S/O BASETTY G., 
AGED ABOUT 4! YEARS, 
R/O NO.I9, 8? MAIN ROAD, 
SRIKANTESHWARA NAGAR, 
NANDINI LAYOUT, 
BENGALURU NORTH, 
BENGALURU - 560 096 
... PETITIONER 
(BY SRI HARISH NARASAPPA, SENIOR COUNSEL 
SRI. SMARAN SHETTY, ADVOCATE) 


AND: 


SMT. SHOBHA KARANDLAJE, 

D/O LATE MONAPPA GOWDA, 

NO.I6, 2X? MAIN ROAD, 

38? CROSS, NEW BEL ROAD, CHIKKAMARANHALLI, 
BENGALURU - 560 094. 


... RESPONDENT 
(BY SRI. VENKATESH DALAWAI, ADVOCATE) 


THIS ELECTION PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 8॥ OF REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE 
ACT, 95! PRAYING TO DECLARE THAT THE RESULT OF THE ELECTION OF RESPONDENT, AS THE 
RETURNED CANDIDATE FROM THE 24 NORTH BENGALURU PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCY IS 
NULL AND VOID IN TERMS OF SECTION 00(b), SECTION l00(d)G@) AND SECTION l00(d)Gv) OF THE 
REPRESENTATION OF PEOPLE'S ACT, 95!. 


[भाग ave 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


THIS ELECTION PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 2.04.2025, 
COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT OF ORDER, THIS DAY, MADE THE FOLLOWING: 


CORAM: THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE E.S. INDIRESH 


CAV ORDER 
ORDERS ON IA No.2 OF 2024 AND IA No. 3 OF 2024 


l. In this petition, the petitioner has sought for declaration that, the election of respondent, being the 
Returned candidate, from the 24-North Bengaluru Parliamentary Constituency as null and void in terms of Section 
00(b), L00(d)G) and 00(d)(iv) of the Representation of the People's Act, 95! (hereinafter referred to as Act). 


2. On service of summons, respondent entered appearance and filed detailed written statement, denying the 
averments made in the Election Petition. The respondent has filed application in IA No.2 of 2024 under Section 
8(3) of the Act, seeking dismissal of the Election Petition for non-compliance of Section 8(3) of the Act. The 
respondent has filed IA No.3 of 2024 under Section 83()(a)(b)(c) and (2) of the Act read with Order VII Rule I (a) 
and (d) of the Code of Civil Procedure, seeking rejection of Election Petition as devoid of cause of action as well as 
not complying with the mandatory requirements under Section 83()(a)(b)(c) as well as proviso to Section 83(]) and 
(2) of the Act. 


3. The applications were heard on merits and disposed of by this order. 


4. In order to decide the applications in IA No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024 filed by the respondent 
for rejection of Election Petition, it is relevant to extract the prayer made in the Election Petition, which reads as 
under: 


”a) Call for the entire records from the Returning Officer pertaining to the nomination papers, FORM 
26 and all other papers filed by respondent १०.4 ; 


b) Declare that the result of the Election of respondent 0.7 as the returned candidate from the 24 
North Bengaluru Parliamentary Constituency is null and void in terms of Section _\00(b), Section 
20०0(8)0) and Section /00 (d)(iv) of the Representation of the People’s Act /957, 


c) | Pass such other orders as this Hon'ble deems fit in the facts and circumstances of the case, in the 
interest of justice and equity." 


d) Award costs towards this petition. 
(Emphasis supplied) 
FACTS OF THE CASE:- 


5. The petitioner has presented the Election Petition on 9™ July, 2024 stating that the petitioner is an Elector 
of 24-North Bangalore Parliamentary Constituency and Voter Identification Card of the petitioner is produced at 
Annexure-Bl. It is stated that the petitioner preferred this Election Petition in the capacity as an Elector under 
Section 8] of the Act. It is further averred in the petition that, the Election Commission of India notified the General 
Elections to Lok Sabha on 6.03.2024 and calendar of events for Parliamentary Constituency No.24, North 
Bengaluru is as under: 


Event chedule 
Announcement and Issue of Press Note 6 March, 2024 (Saturday) 
Issue of Notification 28 March, 2024 (Thursday) 
Last date for filing of Nominations 04 April, 2024 (Thursday) 
Scrutiny of Nomination 05 April, 2024 (Friday) 
Last date for withdrawal of candidature 08 April, 2024 (Monday) 
Date of Poll 26 April, 2024 (Friday) 
Date of Counting of Votes 04 June, 2024 

(Tuesday) 
Date before which the election shall be completed 06 June, 2024 

(Thursday) 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


6. It is further stated in the petition that, the Government of Karnataka by its notification dated 28.03.2024 
(Annexure-C) notified the proposed 2024 General Elections as per Annexure-D. It is further averred in the petition 
that the respondent has filed her nomination paper in FORM 2A under Rule 4 of the Conduct of the Election Rule, 
96l on 03.04.2024 (as per Annexure-E) and same was scrutinized by the Returning Officer. In addition to the 
nomination paper, the respondent has filed affidavit in FORM 26 under Rule 4A of Conduct of Election Rules, 
96] (hereinafter to referred to as Rules, 96l) as per Annexure-F. The list of candidates for 24 North Bangalore 
Constituency is produced at Annexure-G. Election was held on 26.04.2024 and after the counting of votes, on 
04.06.2024 and the respondent was declared as Returned Candidate for 24-North Bangalore Constituency. It is also 
averred in the petition that affidavit in FORM 26 filed by the respondent demonstrates the concealment of criminal 
proceedings and the respondent has not disclosed the status of her financial assets and liabilities. Therefore, it is 
contended by the petitioner that, the FORM 26 affidavit filed by the respondent is contrary to the provisions 
of the Act and Rules, [96] and also the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in this regard. 


7. The petitioner has raised following grounds: 
7A The FORM 26 Affidavit of the respondent does not disclose the pending Criminal proceedings. 
7.2 The FORM 26 Affidavit does not adequately provide details of pending Criminal proceedings. 


73 The Returning Officer has not provided the details in compliance of the direction of the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court in W.P.(Civil) No.536 of 20I]. 


74 The respondent has not disclosed the previous Criminal proceedings. 


45 FORM 26 Affidavit does not properly disclose the Financial Assets and Liabilities of the 
respondent. 


7.6 Concealment and Mis-statement in FORM 26 Affidavit amounts to "Corrupt Practice”. 


8. The petitioner, by urging the aforementioned grounds, pleaded that, as per Rule 4(A) of the Rules, 96], it 
is the duty of the candidate to disclose all relevant details as part of the Nomination Process. Such disclosure in 
FORM 26 Affidavit is intended to provide the Electorate and the public at large as to participate in the democratic 
process. It is the contention of the petitioner that, the respondent has failed to make necessary disclosure of the 
Criminal proceedings in which she was arrayed as an accused at the time of filing of FORM 26 Affidavit and 
therefore, sought for interference of this Court. 


8.l It is also contended by the petitioner that, the respondent has disclosed only five proceedings at 
SLNo.5 of the FORM 26 affidavit, whereas, the respondent has failed to disclose other proceedings which were 
pending as on the date of filing of the nomination paper, particularly, the proceedings in the case of Joint 
Director, Directorate of Enforcement Vs. Smt. Shobha Karandlaje (in MSA No.\2 of 208) which is pending 
consideration before the competent Court as per Annexure-H. It is the grievance of the petitioner that, the 
respondent has mentioned the proceedings in MSA २०.]2 of 208 during filing of nomination in the 20l9 Lok 
Sabha Election and Copy of the FORM 26 Affidavit filed by the respondent is produced at Annexure-J. Hence, it 
is stated that the respondent has deliberately omitted to mention the proceedings of MSA ]२०.।।2 of 20I8 in 
FORM 26 Affidavit and suppression of the said aspect requires to be considered in the Election Petition. It is also 
contended by the petitioner that, the respondent has been arraigned as accused in PCR No.55750 of 206 
pending consideration before the X Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Mayohall, Bengaluru (Annexure-K) and 
therefore, concealing the aforementioned aspect attracts Section l00 () (9) (i) and (iv) of the Act. 


8.2 It is further contended by the petitioner that, the respondent, at SI.No.5 of her FORM 26 Affidavit, 
disclosed the pending Criminal proceedings, however, the respondent failed to provide the material particulars 
or adequate information and description, namely; i) nature of the Crime, ii) the seriousness of the offence 
alleged, iii) the involvement of the candidate to the alleged Crime, iv) the punishment for such an offence, and 
v) the cumulative impact of these factors on the suitability, character and fitness of the candidate to 
contest in the Lok Sabha Election. It is also stated that, four out of five of the Criminal proceedings disclosed in 
FORM 26 Affidavit do not contain the description and therefore, sought for interference of this Court. 


8.3 It is also pleaded by the petitioner that, the proceedings under Section 45() of PML Act read with 
Section 200 of Cr.P.C., does not disclose the details of the amount alleged to have been invested by 
the respondent in Shell Company, the details of the alleged Money Laundering, involvement of the 
respondent in the transaction and corresponding imprisonment were absent in FORM 26 Affidavit. 


8.4 It is also stated in the petition that, the respondent has failed to follow the guidelines issued by 
the Election Commission of India, dated 0.0.20l8 and the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of 


[भाग W—ate 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


Public Interest Foundation and Others Vs. Union of India, (W.P.Civil ४०.5३6/2077) in a prescribed standard 
formats, relating to her Criminal antecedents and therefore, it is the duty of the Returning Officer to consider 
the same as per the provisions under the Act and the Rules 96l. Referring to the judgment of this Court in 
Mudiyappa Vs. Basavaraj (9.7.00.70729/2023, dated 70.07.2024), it is contended that, not disclosing the Criminal 
proceedings attracts the provisions under the Act. 


8.5 Nextly, it is pleaded in the Petition about the disclosure of financial liabilities and assets in FORM 
26 Affidavit. The respondent has disclosed only one loan availed by her to an extent of Rs.4,06,00,640/- owed to 
M/s. Adarsha Developers and no further information is provided. It is also stated that, the respondent has provided the 
outstanding amount and further not disclosed nature of the loan i.e. the amount borrowed is secured or un-secured 
loan, the nature of re- payment as well as the relationship between the respondent and the creditor, which is 
conspicuously absent in FORM 26 Affidavit. Therefore, it is the contention of the petitioner that, the respondent 
deliberately suppressed and concealed as well as withhold the crucial information from the electorant, which amounts 
to guilty of "Corrupt Practice" under Section 23(2) of the Act and same is in violation of the judgment of the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Krishnamoorthy Vs. Sivakumar and Others reported in (205) 
3 SCC 467 and in the case of Lok Prahari Vs. Union of India reported in (2076) 4 SCC 699. Hence, the petitioner 
has presented this Election Petition. 


9. Upon entering appearance, the respondent filed written statement and also IA No.2 of 2024 and JA 
No.3 of 2024, seeking rejection of the Petition on the ground that the specific allegations of Corrupt practice as 
urged in the Petition do not meet the basic requirements of law. It is further stated in the said applications that, no trial 
or enquiry is required to be made in the Petition as the same does not disclose a triable issue or cause of action and 
accordingly, sought for dismissal of the Petition. 


0. It is the contention of the respondent that the copy of Election Petition served upon the respondent, 
has not been attested by the petitioner in his own signature as true copy. It is the contention of the respondent that, 
the petitioner is misleading the Court and not stated in the petition as to what was required in law to be 
disclosed in the FORM 26 Affidavit, except the information provided by the respondent in FORM 26 Affidavit. It is 
stated that, the proceedings initiated under PML Act, are essentially attachment proceedings which are not Criminal 
Proceedings and as such, the Enforcement Directorate preferred MSA ]२०.2 of 208, which is civil in nature and not 
required to be disclosed in FORM 26 Affidavit and same is set aside by the Appellate Authority. It is also stated that, 
the allegation regarding PCR No.55750 of 206 is pertaining to a private complaint filed by one Roshan Baig against 
the respondent which came to be dismissed for non-prosecution on 20.05.207 by same was restored as per the order 
dated 5.06.207 of this Court and as on the date of nomination to be filed by the respondent, the competent Trial 
Court has not taken cognizance nor issued summons to the respondent for appearance and therefore, there is no 
requirement in law to mention about the said case even though same was mentioned in the previous affidavit. The 
said case has not been categorized as heinous offence under Section 8 of the Act. It is also averred in the written 
statement and applications that, the sole requirement prescribed under Section 33-A of the Act, is with regard to cases 
where cognizance has been taken and charges framed therein by the competent court and in the absence of any 
positive assumption made in the Election Petition, merely non-mentioning of civil cases does not attract the rigor of 
disqualification. It is also stated in the applications that, the guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
cases referred to above has been followed by the respondent and nomination has been filed along with FORM 26 
Affidavit and those documents have been scrutinized scrupulously by the Returning Officer and therefore, sought 
for dismissal of the Election Petition. 


ll. In response to the applications in IA No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024, the petitioner has filed 
statement of objections, contending that the said applications have been filed to protract the process of Trial in order to 
succeed in dragging the proceedings beyond the term for which the respondent has been elected. It is further stated in 
the statement of objections that, the petitioner has produced all relevant facts and particulars in the Election 
Petition, which would disclose the cause of action to set-aside the Election of the respondent on the ground of 
"Corrupt practices". It is further stated that the petitioner has pleaded all the material facts and particulars as required 
under Section 83(])(9) and (b) of the Act, which discloses the cause of action. It is also stated in the statement of 
objections that the existence of cause of action as narrated in the petition is sufficient for conducting trial in the 
Election Petition and whether the cause of action narrated का the petition against the respondent is weak 
or strong is a matter of Trial which would be proved during the course of Trial. In addition to this, the petitioner 
has stated that the petitioner has provided all particulars relating to the "Corrupt practices" indulged by the respondent, 
as alleged, in the Election Petition and as such, it is contended that, reading of the entire petition comprehensively, 
makes it clear that the material facts narrated in the Election Petition are within the ambit of Section 23 of the Act. 
Hence, sought for dismissal of the applications. 


2. Heard, Sri. Harish Narasappa, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Sri. Smaran Shetty, learned 
counsel appearing for the petitioner and Sri. Venkatesh Dalawai, learned counsel appearing for the respondent. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


CONTENTIONS OF THE LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL APPEARING FOR THE PETITIONER 


3. Sri. Harish Narasappa, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Sri. Smaran Shetty, learned 
counsel appearing for the petitioner, argued on IA No.2 of 2024 that, Election Petition was filed in strict 
compliance with Section 8l(3) of the Act, and the Registry of this Court has verified additional sets of the 
Election Petition and found them to be in conformity with law and procedure thereunder, and thereafter this Court has 
issued notice to the respondent. It is contended by the learned Senior Counsel that, the question of ante dating the 
verifying affidavit does not arise since, the said affidavit bears the seal and signature of the notary and attestation of 
the said affidavit reflects the date on which the affidavit was executed by the petitioner. He further contended 
that, the petitioner did not filed the verifying affidavit at the time of filing of the Election Petition though same is 
not required under the Act, and further, affidavit in FORM 25 was filed along with the petition as per the 
Rules, however, the Registry of this Court has raised objection regarding the non-filing of verifying affidavit. 
Thereafter, the petitioner, with the leave of this Court, complied with the office objections raised by the Registry 
and as such, verifying affidavit has been filed in support of the Election Petition. It is also contended by the learned 
Senior Counsel that, there exists no consequential defect as alleged by the respondent and accordingly, sought for 
dismissal of IA No.2 of 2024. 


3. To buttress his arguments learned Senior Counsel places reliance on the judgments of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the cases of Murarka Radhey Shyam Ram Kumar Vs. Roop Singh Rathore and Others reported in 
(7964) 3 SCR 573, Dr. Anup Singh Vs. Shri. Abdul Ghani and Others reported in (४9०65) 7 SCR 38 and Ch. 
Subba Rao Vs. Member, Election Tribunal reported in (964) 6 SCR 273 and argued that, the term 
“copy” under Section 8(3) of the Act does not require exact transcript and the ministerial errors or omissions by 
notaries/oath commissioners are not fatal to a Election Petition and same do not provide a ground for dismissal of 
the Election Petition. 


3.2 It is also contended by the learned Senior Counsel that, the petitioner has amended the Election 
Petition by deleting the Returning Officer, who arraigned as respondent No.2 in the Election Petition and made 
necessary changes in the Election Petition without urging additional grounds or new documents have been produced 
and therefore, sought for dismissal of IA No.2 of 2024. It is also contended by the learned Senior Counsel 
appearing for the petitioner that, the objection raised by the respondent are hyper technical in nature, which are 
inconsequential and the Hon’ble Supreme Court has consistently held that minor procedural defects are curable and 
should not result in rejection of the Election Petition, unless, there is a failure of substantial compliance 
made therein in the petition. 


3.3 Sri. Harish Narasappa, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner asserts that, IA No.3 of 
2024 is devoid of merits and same is filed to protract the proceedings. It is the contention of the learned Senior 
Counsel that, the petitioner has set out the specific instances of suppression of material information by the respondent 
in her nomination papers, which squarely fall within the ambit of ‘Corrupt Practices’ under Section 23 of the 
Act. He also refers to the judgment referred to in the Election Petition and submitted that, the respondent is attempting 
to bid to evade the judicial scrutiny of this Court. It is also submitted by the learned Senior Counsel by referring to 
FORM 26 Affidavit that, the respondent has not disclosed pending Criminal proceeding in MSA No.I2 of 208 and 
not adequately provide details of pending Criminal proceedings. It is also argued that, the respondent has not 
disclosed prior Criminal proceedings as per the declaration of law in the case of Mudiyappa supra, inter-alia 
argued that, FORM 26 Affidavit does not disclose the status of the financial liabilities and assets of the respondent, 
particularly, referring to the nature of loan availed by the respondent from the creditor and therefore, argued that 
such concealment in the FORM 26 Affidavit amounts to ‘Corrupt Practices’ under the Act. Learned Senior counsel 
appearing for the petitioner places reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case Bhim Rao 
Baswanth Rao Patil vs. K. Madan Mohan Rao and Others reported in (2023) I8 SCC 237 and contended that, 
the idea behind disclosure of Criminal antecedents is to ensure transparency and enable the voters to make an 
informed choice while casting their vote in the election and therefore, the Election Petition cannot be rejected 
whimsically and cause of action for a full fledged trial is required in this petition. 


3.4 Referring to paragraph Nos.20 to 28 of the Election Petition, Sri. Harish Narasappa, learned 
Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that, the FORM 26 Affidavit shall contain the required material 
for fair electioneering process and that apart, the petitioner being a voter of the constituency must know the 
antecedents of the respondent and therefore, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner contended that, 
dismissing the Election Petition at the threshold for the alleged deficiencies and lack of material facts and 
particulars, which are curable in nature and therefore, places reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court 
in the case of Sardar Harcharan Singh Brar vs. Sukh Darshan Singh and Others reported in (2004) 77 SCC 
496. It is further contended by the learned Senior counsel that, non-compliance with the affidavit requirement 
under Section 83() of the Act, does not justify dismissal under Section 86(/) of the Act. It is also contended by the 
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner that, the Election Petition has to be read as whole and cannot be 
dissected in piecemeal to determine the cause of action and as such, by referring to the judgment in the case of 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 7 


Kimneo Haokip Hangshing vs. Kenn Raikhan and Others reported in 2024 INSC 689, it is argued that, Election 
Petition should not be rejected at the very threshold where there is a substantial compliance of the provisions. Hence, 
the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that, this Court has to see whether the pleadings in 
the petition constitute a cause of action and cannot comes to the conclusion that, a roving enquiry is not required inter- 
alia, dismiss the petition at the threshold. 


3.5 Referring to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of G.M. Siddeshwar ys. 
Prasanna Kumar, reported in (2073) 4 SCC 776, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that, 
the language contained under Section 83()(C) of the Act requires the verification as per the provisions under CPC 
and the said affidavit alone shall stand and such affidavit cannot be considered as incomplete. He also refers to 
paragraph 25 in the above judgment and contended that the Act does not require a verification of the pleadings in the 
Election Petition and same do not find place in Section 83(l)(C) of the Act. Referring to the judgment of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of A. Manju vs. Prajwal Revanna @ Prajawal R. and Others reported in (2022)3 
SCC 269, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner contended that, it is too early to adjudicate the petition 
insofar as defect in the affidavit and therefore, contended that, the applications deserve to be dismissed. Referring to 
the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Madiraju Venkata Ramana Raju vs. Peddireddigari 
Ramachandra Reddy and Others reported in (2076) 74 SCC 4॥, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner 
submitted that the cause of action embodies a bundle of facts and the petitioner has produced ample material facts 
for challenging the Election proceedings and triable issues are required to be framed by this Court for final 
adjudication and therefore, it is too early to consider the allegation made by the learned counsel for the respondent 
and accordingly, sought for dismissal of the applications. It is also argued that, this Court has to see the averments 
in the petition alone while considering the application for rejection of petition and further submitted that, there is no 
merit in IA No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024 and accordingly, sought for dismissal of the applications. 


CONTENTIONS OF THE LEARNED COUNSEL FOR THE RESPONDENT: 


4. Sri. Venkatesh P. Dalawai, learned counsel appearing for the respondent- Returned Candidate 
reiterates the averments made in the written statement and applications in IA No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024. It is 
submitted by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that, though the defects in the Election Petition, have 
been pointed out by the respondent herein, however, same has not been considered and complied with by the 
petitioner and no leverage can be extended to rectify the defects by the petitioner. It is contended that the petitioner 
has not attested some of the Annexures in the petition as required under Section 8l(3) of the Act, and signatures 
appended in some of the Annexures are different and no explanation is forthcoming in the objections filed to the 
applications. It is the principal submission of the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that, the affidavit dated 
9.07.2024 is different from affidavit filed subsequent to allow the amendment application. It is also contended 
by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that, the verifying affidavit was sworn to before the competent 
notary with ante dated as if it was sworn to by the petitioner on 9.07.2024 and this aspect was not disputed by the 
petitioner in statement of objections to IA No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024 and therefore, contended that the 
petitioner is misleading the Court by comparing the verifying affidavit with FORM 25 Affidavit. It is contended by 
the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that, the procedure for the Election Petition requires certain things 
to be done as per the provisions under the Act, compared to any other petitions and further, though the requirement of 
the compliance has been pointed out, the petitioner has ignored the same and therefore, in terms of the judgment of 
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of C.P.John vs. Babu M. Palissery and Others reported in (2074) 70 SCC 
547, Sri. Venkatesh P. Dalawai, learned counsel appearing for the respondent argued that, the Election Petition 
deserves to be rejected at the threshold. He also submitted that, the prescribed proper procedure for filing of the 
petition is as per the Rules and same will have to be done in that manner only and same cannot be considered as hyper 
technical in nature since the intention of the Act and Rules is to fix the responsibility of the person, who files the 
petition and accordingly, sought for interference of this court to dismiss the petition. Referring to the provisions 
under Section 83(]) (C) and (2) of the Act, Sri. Venkatesh P. Dalawai, learned counsel appearing for the respondent 
argued that every document or Annexure filed with the Election Petition mandatorily requires the verification as 
per the provisions under the Act, as well as Order VI Rule 5 of CPC. These provisions are mandatory in nature and 
without complying with the aforementioned statutory obligations, the Election Petition is liable to be 
dismissed. 


4.] Nextly, learned counsel appearing for the respondent made submission on the compliance of FORM 
26 Affidavit by the respondent at the time of filing of nomination papers. Referring to the petition averments 
particularly, paragraphs 45 to 9 and 4] to 49 are not part of FORM 26 Affidavit. In these paragraphs, no allegation 
has been made with regard to "Corrupt practice" in the Electioneering process. If the said aspect is accepted, then 
that paragraphs at I5 to 9 and 4! to 49 have to be struck off from the pleadings then the Election Petition become 
incomplete even for issuance of summons by this Court. Referring to page No.29 of respondent copy, which has 
been served to the respondent and page No.!80 of the Court Copy referring to office objection No.3, it is contended 
that only the affidavit filed under Rule 94-A of the Rules is enclosed and no verifying affidavit has been filed 
by the petitioner and accordingly submitted that same contravenes Section 8l(3) of the Act and as such sought 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


for dismissal of the Election Petition. 


4.2 Sri. Venkatesh P. Dalawai, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the Election Petition 
does not disclose cause of action and no material facts are produced in the Election Petition. Referring to the 
averments in the Election Petition, it is submitted that there is no suppression of material facts in the FORM 26 
Affidavit and as such referred to paragraph No.2] of the Election Petition as well as the provisions contained under 
Section 33-A(l) of the Act, learned counsel appearing for the respondent contended that the petitioner has not 
furnished any particulars as required under Section 33-A of the Act and if such an offence is punishable with two or 
more years of imprisonment and if cognizance is taken and charge is framed thereunder and in the absence 
of these material facts, the Election Petition requires to be dismissed and same has to be construed as abuse of 
process of law by the petitioner. Inviting the attention of the Court to the chart, referring to the cases, Sri. Venkatesh 
P. Dalawai, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that S].Nos.| to 3 are pertaining to same case which came to 
be dismissed on 7.03.202! and no charge has been framed against the respondent. Sl.No.4 is pertaining to 
defamation case filed by one Roshan Baig, in which no cognizance has been taken by the competent court and no 
charge has been framed. Insofar as the cases referred to at SI.Nos.5 to 7, it is contended by the learned counsel for 
the respondent that these are the attachment proceedings which are not criminal in nature though arising out of the 
provisions of PML Act and the orders were passed in favour of the respondent by the Appellate Authority, and 
as such refutes the contentions of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner. 


4.3 Nextly, it is contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that, MSA No.2/20i8 was 
filed by the Enforcement Directorate, which are pending consideration before the competent court and are not in the 
nature of criminal proceedings. Insofar as the loan particulars furnished by the respondent is concerned, it is 
contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that nothing has been stated in the Election Petition by the 
petitioner pointing out the absence of material particulars and therefore, submitted that the Election Petition is devoid 
of merits and as such, sought for rejection of the same. 


4.4 It is also contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that the respondent has been elected 
with a margin of more than |.5 lakhs votes in the General Election and as the Election Petition lacks details of the 
petitioner and his background and has been set up by certain inimical persons and further the present petition 
has been filed to harass the respondent and accordingly, sought for dismissal of the Election Petition at the 
threshold on the ground of lack of material facts. 


4.5 Referring to the judgment dated 0.0i.2024 of this Court in WP No.l0729/2023, it is argued 
by Sri. Venkatesh P. Dalawai that the issue involved in the said writ petition was with regard to the provisions 
contained under the Gram Panchayat Act and Section 33-A of the Act has not been dealt in the said judgment and 
therefore, same is not applicable to the facts of this case. 


4.6 Nextly, Sri. Venkatesh P. Dalawai, learned counsel for the respondent referred to the verification 
paragraph at page 26 of the Election Petition and submitted that, the verification paragraph do not contain the date and 
place on which the Election Petition has been filed by the petitioner which is mandatorily required as per 
Order VI Rule 5 of CPC and therefore, it is contended that, the petition deserves to be dismissed. 


4.7 It is also submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent that, in the verifying affidavit at page 
27, the Annexures at A, B-l, ४] to M7 were included and same has not been incorporated in the copy of the 
respondent and therefore, it is contended that, the petition requires to be dismissed for non- compliance of Section 00 
of the Act. To buttress his arguments, learned counsel for the respondent places reliance on the judgment of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Krishnamoorthy (supra) and in the case of Dhartipakar Madan Lal Agarwal 
vs. Rajiv Gandhi reported in 79867 Supp.SCC 93. Referring to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the 
case of C.P. Jonh vs. Babu M. Pallissery and Others reported in (2074) l0 SCC 547, particularly, referring to 
paragraphs 46 and 38, it is contended by the learned counsel for the respondent that, as the petitioner has failed to 
remove the defect in the Election Petition despite the opportunity has been extended to him and therefore, the petition 
requires to be dismissed. 


4.8 Learned counsel for the respondent places reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in the case of Karim Uddin Barbhuiya vs. Aminul Haque Laskar and Others reported in 2024 SCC Online SC 
509 and argued with reference to compliance of Section !00(/) (9) (i) of the Act, that, it is not open for the 
Petitioner to state at the later stage as to how "Corrupt Practice" has materially affected the result of the election. It 
is the duty of the petitioner to produce cogent material as to how the Nomination Form of respondent herein contained 
irrelevant material, so also, suppression of materials by the Returned Candidate. Referring to the judgment of the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kanimozhi Karunanidhi vs. A. Santhana Kumar and Others 
reported in 2023 SCC Online SC 573, at paragraphs 27 and 32, it is argued that, the Election Petition deserves 
to be dismissed summarily on the omission of a single material fact leading to an incomplete cause of action and 
therefore, it is submitted that, [A No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024 have to be allowed. He further contended that, 


[भाग W—ate 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


though the learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that substantial compliance has been made to 
cure the defects in the Election Petition and the said submission cannot be accepted on the sole ground that, the 
statutory requirement under the Act has to be scrupulously followed and complied with to remove the entire defect 
as required under Section !00 of the Act, where the legality of the election of the Return Candidate is challenged and 
any result in the petition would affect the democratic process and therefore, it is argued that, the petitioner be 
cautious before filing the Election Petition and as such, sought for dismissal of the Election Petition. 


ANALYSIS: 


5. In the light of the submission made by the learned counsel for the parties, I have carefully examined the 
pleadings on record and the rival submission made by the learned counsels for the parties confining to IA No.2 of 
2024 and IA No.3 of 2024. 


6. IA No.2 of 2024 has been filed by the respondent, seeking rejection of the petition for non- compliance 
of Section 8(3) of the Act referring to original petition filed before this Court with the copy of the petition sent to the 
respondent through summons, where a defective copy has been served to the respondent. This court vide order dated 
25.09.2024 pursuant to the memo dated 24.09.2024 filed by the respondent, copy of the Election Petition along 
with the summons received by the respondent was kept in safe custody. These documents were also perused at the 
time of arguments. 


7. Insofar as submission made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties on IA No.3 of 2024 filed by 
the respondent seeking dismissal of the Election Petition for not complying with the requirement of Section 
83()(a)(b)(c) as well as_ proviso to Section 83(/) and (2) and Section 8(3) of the Act, I find that it is expedient to 
consider the applications on merits. 


8. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent has contended that the petition is devoid of merits 
on the ground of lack of cause of action and learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner replied that the 
essential facts have been narrated and same is required to be proved during the trial. In this backdrop of the matter, 
the following points have to be answered on these applications: 


(l) Whether the averments made in the Election Petition lacks material facts and do not disclose the 
cause of action? 


(2) Whether the grounds urged by the respondent in IA No.2 of 2024 and IA No.3 of 2024 are just and 
proper, to reject Election petition? 


(3) What order ? 


9. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties, it is well established principle in law 
that, while considering the application under Order VII Rule ll of the Civil Procedure Code, it is the duty of 
the Court to look into the averments made in the plaint/petition alone and documents produced along with the 
plaint/petition. The plaintiff/petitioner must make out a case for conducting trial/enquiry, inter-alia demonstrates that, 
triable issues are involved in the suit/petition and further the Court should not be misguided with the defence 
taken in the written statement. The petition/plaint could be rejected, if the allegations made in the petition/plaint, are 
bald and does not disclose the cause of action. It is also pertinent to mention here that while considering such 
application, the Court has to apply its mind as to grounds urged by the respondent/defendant in the application, comes 
within the parameters of Order VII Rule I! of the Code of Civil Procedure. The entire averments in the 
plaint/petition has to be read in whole as to satisfy the ingredients contemplated under Order VII Rule ! of the 
Code of Civil Procedure. At this juncture, it is also to be noted that, if the petition averments lacks cause of action 
or there is a patent error to exercise the jurisdiction by the competent Court, such application has to be accepted to 
save the judicial time and not to allow the petitioner/plaintiff to proceed in the matter further as the same will cause 
hardship/injury to the defendant/respondent. Hence, it is relevant to follow the following law declared by the Hon'ble 
Apex Court in relation to considering the application filed under Order VII Rule I! of the Civil Procedure Code, in 
respect of Election Petition. 


20. Recently, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Correspondence, RBANMS Educational Institution vs. 
B. Gunashekar and Another reported in 2025 SCC Online SC 793 at Paragraphs 4 and 5 held as follows: 


“4, Let us first examine the scope and purpose of Order VIT Rule l! CPC. This Court in 
Dahiben v. Arvindbhai Kalyanji Bhanusali (Gajra) dead through legal representatives, explained in 
detail the applicable law for deciding the application for rejection of the plaint. The relevant 
paragraphs of the said decision are reproduced below: 


0 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


SZ slh.cet 


23.2. The remedy under Order VII Rule ॥7 is an independent and special remedy, wherein the 
Court is empowered to summarily dismiss a suit at the threshold, without proceeding to record 
evidence, and conducting a trial, on the basis of the evidence adduced, if it is satisfied that the 
action should be terminated on any of the grounds contained in this provision. 


23.3. The underlying object of Order VII Rule 77 (a) is that if in a suit, no cause of action is 
disclosed, or the suit is barred by limitation under Rule I] (d), the Court would not permit 
the plaintiff to unnecessarily protract the proceedings in the suit. In such a case, it would be 
necessary to put an end to the sham litigation, so that further judicial time is not wasted. 


23.4. In Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhil3 this Court held that the whole purpose of 
conferment of powers under this provision is to ensure that a litigation which is meaningless, 
and bound to prove abortive, should not be permitted to waste judicial time of the court, in the 
following words : (SCC p.324, para 72) 


म_|2, ...The whole purpose of conferment of such power is to ensure that a litigation which is 
meaningless, and bound to prove abortive should not be permitted to occupy the time of the 
Court, and exercise the mind of the respondent. The sword of Damocles need not be kept 
hanging over his head unnecessarily without point or purpose. Even in an ordinary civil 
litigation, the Court readily exercises the power to reject a plaint, if it does not disclose any 
cause of action.” 


23.5. The power conferred on the court to terminate a civil action is, however, a drastic one, 
and the conditions enumerated in Order VII Rule 74 are required to be strictly adhered to. 


23.6. Under Order VII Rule 74, a duty is cast on the Court to determine whether the plaint 
discloses a cause of action by scrutinizing the averments in the plaintl4 read in conjunction with 
the documents relied upon, or whether the suit is barred by any law. 


23.7. Order VII Rule /4[4) provides for production of documents, on which the plaintiff places 
reliance in his suit, which reads as under: 


>[4, Production of document on which plaintiff sues or relies.-(.) Where a plaintiff sues upon a 
document or relies upon document in his possession or power in support of his claim, he shall 
enter such documents in a list, and shall produce it in Court when the plaint is presented by him 
and shall, at the same time deliver the document and a copy thereof, to be filed with the plaint. 


(2) Where any such document is not in the possession or power of the plaintiff, he shall, 
wherever possible, state in whose possession or power it is. 


(3) A document which ought to be produced in Court by the plaintiff when the plaint is 
presented, or to be entered in the list to be added or annexed to the plaint but is not 
produced or entered accordingly, shall not, without the leave of the Court, be received in 
evidence on his behalf at the hearing of the suit. 


(4) Nothing in this rule shall apply to document produced for the cross examination of the 
plaintiff's witnesses, or, handed over to a witness merely to refresh his memory.” 


(emphasis supplied) 


23.8. Having regard to Order VII Rule 74 CPC, the documents filed alongwith the plaint, 
are required to be taken into consideration for deciding the application under Order VII Rule 
(4). When a document referred to in the plaint, forms the basis of the plaint, it should be 
treated as a part of the plaint. 


23.9. In exercise of power under this provision, the Court would determine if the assertions 
made in the plaint are contrary to statutory law, or judicial dicta, for deciding whether a 
case for rejecting the plaint at the threshold is made out. 


23.l0. At this stage, the pleas taken by the defendant in the written statement and 
application for rejection of the plaint on the merits, would be irrelevant, and cannot be adverted 
to, or taken into consideration! 5. 


[भाग —eve 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण |] 


23.44. The test for exercising the power under Order VII Rule व is that if the averments 
made in the plaint are taken in entirety, in conjunction with the documents relied upon, would 
the same result in a decree being passed. This test was laid down in Liverpool & 
London S.P. & I Assn. Ltd. v. M.V. Sea Success I which reads as : (SCC p.562, para /39) 


“]39, Whether a plaint discloses a cause of action or not is essentially a question of fact. 
But whether it does or does not must be found out from reading the plaint itself. For the said 
purpose, the averments made in the plaint in their entirety must be held to be correct. The test is 
as to whether if the averments made in the plaint are taken to be correct in their entirety, a 
decree would be passed.” 


23. /2. In Hardesh Ores (P.) Ltd. 9. Hede & (०.76 the Court further held that it is not 
permissible to cull out a sentence or a passage, and to read it in isolation. It is the 
substance, and not merely the form, which has to be looked into. The plaint has to be 
construed as it stands, without addition or subtraction of words. If the allegations in the plaint 
prima facie show a cause of action, the court cannot embark upon an enquiry whether the 
allegations are true in fact. D. Ramachandran v. R.V. Janakiraman. 


23.43. If on a meaningful reading of the plaint, it is found that the suit is manifestly vexatious 
and without any merit, and does not disclose a right to sue, the court would be justified in 
exercising the power under Order VII Rule 77 CPC. 


23.44. The power under Order VII Rule I] CPC may be exercised by the Court at any 
stage of the suit, either before registering the plaint, or after issuing summons to the 
defendant, or before conclusion of the trial, as held by this Court in the judgment of 
Saleem Bhai v. State of Maharashtral8. The plea that once issues are framed, the matter must 
necessarily go to trial was repelled by this Court in Azhar Hussain (supra). 


23.435. The provision of Order VIT Rule या is mandatory in nature. It states that the 
plaint “shall” be rejected if any of the grounds specified in clause (a) to (e) are made 
out. If the Court finds that the plaint does not disclose a cause of action, or that the suit is 
barred by any law, the Court has no option, but to reject the plaint. 


, 


24. “Cause of action” means every fact which would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove, 
if traversed, in order to support his right to judgment. It consists of a bundle of material facts, 
which are necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to entitle him to the reliefs claimed in the 
suit. 


24.4. In Swamy Atmanand 7. Sri Ramakrishna पच[ए0/क्ावा। 9 this Court held: 


“24. A cause of action, thus, means every fact, which if traversed, it would be necessary for 
the plaintiff to prove an order to support his right to a judgment of the court. In other 
words, it is a bundle of facts, which taken with the law applicable to them gives the plaintiff 
a right to relief against the defendant. It must include some act done by the defendant since in the 
absence of such an act, no cause of action can possibly accrue. It is not limited to the actual 
infringement of the right sued on but includes all the material facts on which it is founded” 


(emphasis supplied) 


24.2. In T. Arivandandam 7. T.V. Satyapal20 this Court held that while considering an 
application under Order VII Rule 77 CPC what is required to be decided is whether the 
plaint discloses a real cause of action, or something purely illusory, in the following words : 
(SCC p. 470, para 5) 


“5. ...The learned Munsif must remember that if on a meaningful - not formal - reading of the 
plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not disclosing a clear right to 
sue, he should exercise his power under Order VII, Rule |l CPC taking care to see that the 
ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. And, if clever drafting has created the illusion of a 
cause of action, nip it in the bud at the first hearing 


उठ 


(emphasis supplied) 


IZ THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


24.3. Subsequently, in .T.C. Ltd. v. Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal2I this Court held 
that law cannot permit clever drafting which creates illusions of a cause of action. What is 
required is that a clear right must be made out in the plaint. 


24.4. — If, however, by clever drafting of the plaint, it has created the illusion of a cause of 
action, this Court in Madanuri Sri Ramachandra Murthy v. Syed Jalal22 held that it 
should be nipped in the bud, so that bogus litigation will end at the earliest stage. The Court 
must be vigilant against any camouflage or suppression, and determine whether the litigation is 
utterly vexatious, and an abuse of the process of the court. 


28. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in State of Punjab v. Gurdev Singh23 held that the 
Court must examine the plaint and determine when the right to sue first accrued to the 
plaintiff, and whether on the assumed facts, the plaint is within time. The words “right to 
sue” means the right to seek relief by means of legal proceedings. The right to sue accrues 
only when the cause of action arises. The suit must be instituted when the right asserted in the 
suit is infringed, or when there is a clear and unequivocal threat to infringe such right by the 
defendant against whom the suit is instituted. Order VII Rule !l(d) provides that where a suit 
appears from the averments in the plaint to be barred by any law, the plaint shall be rejected.” 


4.. Thus, it is clear that the above provision viz., Order VII Rule ! CPC serves as a crucial 
filter in civil litigation, enabling courts to terminate proceedings at the threshold where the plaintiff's 
case, even if accepted in its entirety, fails to disclose any cause of action or is barred by law, 
either express or by implication. The scope of Order VII Rule |! CPC and the authority of the 
courts is well settled in law. There is a bounden duty on the Court to discern and identify 
fictitious suit, which on the face of it would be barred, but for the clever pleadings disclosing a 
cause of action, that is surreal. Generally, sub-clauses (a) and (d) are stand alone grounds, that 
can be raised by the defendant in a suit. However, it cannot be ruled out that under certain 
circumstances, clauses (a) and (d) can be mutually inclusive. For instances, when clever drafting veils 
the implied bar to disclose the cause of action; it then becomes the duty of the Court to lift the 
veil and expose the bar to reject the suit at the threshold. The power to reject a plaint under this 
provision is not merely procedural but substantive, aimed at preventing abuse of the judicial process 
and ensuring that court time is not wasted on fictitious claims failing to disclose any cause of action 
to sustain the suit or barred by law. Therefore, the appeal before us requires careful consideration of 
the scope of rejection of the plaint under Order VII Rule I! CPC, particularly, in the context of the 
suit filed based on an agreement to sell against third parties in possession. 


5. Order VII Rule ll(a) CPC mandates rejection of the plaint where it does not disclose a cause of 
action. In Om Prakash Srivastava v. Union of India24, this Court pointed out that cause of action 
means every fact which, if traversed, would be necessary for the plaintiff to prove in order to support 
their right to judgment. It consists of bundle of facts which narrate the circumstances and the reasons 
for filing such suit. Itis the foundation on which the entire suit would rest. Therefore, it goes 
without saying that merely including a paragraph on cause of action is not sufficient but rather, on a 
meaningful reading of the plaint and the documents, it must disclose a cause of action. The plaint 
should contain such cause of action that discloses all the necessary facts required in law to sustain the 
suit and not mere statements of fact which fail to disclose a legal right of the plaintiff to sue and 
breach or violation by the defendant(s). It is pertinent to note here that even if a right is found, 
unless there is a violation or breach of that right by the defendant, the cause of action should be 
deemed to be unreal. “ 


9. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Harcharan Singh Josh vs. Hari Kishan reported in (7997) 0 
SCC 294, at paragraphs | and 2 held as follows: 


“|. This appeal arises against the order of the Delhi High Court made on 26-5-995 in Election 
Petition No. 6 of 994. The appellant is an unsuccessful candidate in respect of one of the 
Assembly Constituencies known as No. 64, Sadar Bazar, to the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
Assembly. The elections were held on 6-li-!993. The respondent secured 27,!26 votes while the 
appellant secured 25,786 votes. The latter filed an election petition on diverse grounds including 
corrupt practices under Section 23 of the Representation of the People Act, 95!. The High 
Court dismissed his election petition under Section 86 of the Act on its findings on four issues 
framed in that case. While upholding the findings in favour of the appellant on Issues | to 3, it 
held that the requisite number of true copies of the election petition were not supplied to the 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


respondent in compliance with Section 8(3) of the Act. Reasons in support thereof are some grave 
mistakes including omission to supply full text of page No. 8 of the election petition. Another 
contention raised by the respondent was that the affidavit is not a true copy of the affidavit 
which was filed in the court along with the election petition. Though it was rejected by the High 
Court as one of the grounds against the rejection of the election petition, the respondent has filed 
cross- objections. 


2. It is not necessary for us to go into the grounds on which the election petition was dismissed 
by the High Court. Suffice it to state that the objections raised by the respondent regarding non-supply 
of the true copy of the affidavit is a formidable objection which merits acceptance in view of the 
recent judgment of this Court in Shipra (Dr) v. Shanti Lal Khoiwal . Therein the copy of the 
affidavit supplied to the respondent was not attested by the Oath Commissioner. This Court, after 
considering the entire case-law, held that the affirmation before the prescribed authority in the 
affidavit and the supply of its true copy is mandatory so that the returned candidate would not be 
misled in his understanding that imputation of the corrupt practices were solemnly affirmed and 
duly verified before the prescribed authority. For that purpose, Form 25 prescribed by Section 83 
requires verification before the prescribed authority. The concept of substantial compliance has no 
application in such a case. It is seen that the copy of the affidavit supplied to the respondent does not 
contain the affirmation by the Oath Commissioner. Under these circumstances, the defect is not a 
curable defect. Therefore, the dismissal of the election petition on this ground is sustainable in law.” 


20. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kanimozhi Karunanidhi (supra) reported in 2023 SCC 
Online SC 573, at paragraphs ll to I5 and |8 to 28 held that, 


"||. So far as the R.P Act, 95l, is concerned, its object as is reflected in its short title is to 
provide for the conduct of elections of the Houses of Parliament and to the House or Houses of 
the legislature of each State, the qualifications and the disqualifications for membership of those 
Houses, the corrupt practices and other offences at or in connection with such elections and the 
decision of doubts and disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections. Part-VI of the 
R.P. Act, 95l deals with the disputes regarding Elections, and Chapter II thereof deals with the 
presentation of the Election petitions to the High Court. Section 80 thereof states that no election 
shall be called in question except by an election petition presented in accordance with the provisions 
of Part-VI. 


2... Section 80A confers jurisdiction on the High Court to try election petitions. Section 5 deals 
with the presentation of petitions which reads as under: 


“Section 8l. Presentation of Petitions- (l) An election petition calling in question any election may be 
presented on one or more of the grounds specified in [sub-section ()] of Section l00 and 
Section 0l to the High Court by any candidate at such election or any elector [within 
forty-five days from, but not earlier than the date of election of the returned candidate or if 
there are more than one returned candidate at the election and dates of their election are 
different, the later of those two dates]. 


Explanation. —In this sub-section, “elector” means a person who was entitled to vote at the 
election to which the election petition relates, whether he has voted at such election or not. 


(2) [***] 
[(3) Every election petition shall be accompanied by as many copies thereof as there are 
respondents mentioned in the petition and every such copy shall be attested by the petitioner 


under his own signature to be a true copy of the petition.] 


उउ.,. Section 82 mandates as to who shall be the parties to the Election petition. Section 83 pertains 
to the contents of the petition, which reads as under:— 


83. Contents of petition- (/) An election petition— 


(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies; 


(b) — shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including 
as full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt 


4 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


practice and the date and place of the commission of each such practice; and 


(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Civil Procedure 
Code, /996 (5 of /908) for the verification of pleadings: 


[Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also be 
accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt 
practice and the particulars thereof. ] 


(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified in 
the same manner as the petition.] 


4... As per Section 86, the High Court is empowered to dismiss an election petition which does 
not comply with the provisions of Section ठ/ or Section 82 or Section 747, Section 87 deals with the 
procedure to be followed by the High Court which reads as under: 


“87. Procedure before the High Court— 


(7). Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, every election 
petition shall be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure 
applicable under the Civil Procedure Code, /996 (5 of 7996) to the trial of suits: 


Provided that the High Court shall have the discretion to refuse, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, to examine any witness or witnesses if it is of the opinion that the evidence of such 
witness or witnesses is not material for the decision of the petition or that the party tendering 
such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds or with a view to delay the 
proceedings. 


(2) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 7672 (7 of 76722), shall subject to the provisions 
of this Act, be deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of an election petition.” 


I5. The grounds on which the High Court could declare the election of the returned 
candidate to be void are enumerated in Section 799 which reads as under:— 


00. Grounds for declaring election to be void. - () Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) if 
the High Court is of opinion- 


(a) — 
(b) — 
(c) — 


(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been 
materially affected- 


(i) — 
(ii) — 
(iii) — 


(iv) 09 any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules 
or orders made under this Act, the High Court shall declare the election of the returned 
candidate to be void.” 


* ok Ok 


Legal position: 


46. The scheme of the Constitutional and statutory provisions contained in the R.P. Act in 
relation to the nature of the right to elect, the right to be elected and the right to dispute an election 
have been explained and interpreted by various Constitutional Benches since /9352, To cite a few are 
N.P. Ponnuswami v. Returning Officer, Namakkal Constituency, in Jagan Nath v. Jaswant Singh, 
in Bhikji Keshao Joshi v. Brijlal Nandlal Biyani, in Murarka Radhey Shyam Ram Kumar v. Roop 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


Singh Rathore etc. 


49... What has been gleaned from the said authorities may be summed up by stating that a right to 
elect, though fundamental it is to democracy, is neither a fundamental right nor a common law 
right. It is purely a statutory right. Similarly, right to be elected and the right to dispute an 
election are also statutory rights. Since they are statutory creations, they are subject to statutory 
limitations. An Election petition is not an action at common law, nor in equity. It is a special 
jurisdiction to be exercised in accordance with the statute creating it. The concept familiar to 
common law and equity must remain strangers to election law unless statutorily embodied. Thus, the 
entire election process commencing from the issuance from the notification calling upon a 
constituency to elect a member or members right upto the final resolution of the dispute, 
concerning the election is regulated by the Representation of People Act, 95l.The said RP. 
Act therefore has been held to be acomplete and self-contained code within which must 
be found any rights claimed in relation to an election dispute. 


20. In a very interesting and important decision in case of Union of India 9. Association for 
Democratic Reform, a three-judge Bench of this Court raising a question - in a nation wedded to 
republican and democratic form of government, whether before casting votes, the voters have a right 
to know relevant particulars of their candidates contesting election to the Parliament or to the 
legislature of States, deliberated on the powers of the Election Commission under Article 324 of the 
Constitution, and observed as under:— 


“46. To sum up the legal and constitutional position which emerges from the aforesaid 
discussion, it can be stated that: 


I. The jurisdiction of the Election Commission is wide enough to include all powers necessary 
for smooth conduct of elections and the word “elections” is used in a wide sense to include 
the entire process of election which consists of several stages and embraces many steps. 


2. The limitation on plenary character of power is when Parliament or State Legislature 
has made a valid law relating to or in connection with elections, the Commission is required to 
act in conformity with the said provisions. In case where law is silent, Article 324 is a reservoir 
of power to act for the avowed purpose of having free and fair election. The Constitution has 
taken care of leaving scope for exercise of residuary power by the Commission in its own 
right as a creature of the Constitution in the infinite variety of situations that may emerge 
from time to time in a large democracy, as every contingency could not be foreseen or 
anticipated by the enacted laws or the rules. By issuing necessary directions, the Commission 
can fill the vacuum till there is legislation on the subject. In Kanhiya Lal Omar case ((/965) 4 
SCC 628] the Court construed the expression “superintendence, direction and control” in Article 
324[7) and held that a direction may mean an order issued to a particular individual or a precept 
which many may have to follow and it may be a specific or a general order and such phrase 
should be construed liberally empowering the Election Commission to issue such orders. 


3: 


4. To maintain the purity of elections and in particular to bring transparency in the process of 
election, the Commission can ask the candidates about the expenditure incurred by the political 
parties and this transparency in the process of election would include transparency of a 
candidate who seeks election or re- election. In a democracy, the electoral process has a 
strategic role. The little man of this country would have basic elementary right to know full 
particulars of a candidate who is to represent him in Parliament where laws to bind his liberty 
and property may be enacted.” 


24... It is also pertinent to note that the insertion of Rule- 4A and Form-26 appended to the said 
Rules is also culmination of the said observations made this Court in the aforesaid case, which 
require the candidate to disclose the information and particulars in the form of affidavit to be 
submitted along with the nomination paper. 


22. The respondent-Election petitioner in this case has challenged election of the appellant- 
returned candidate under Section 700)(4)(४7०) on the ground of non- compliance of the said Rule- 
4A and the Form-26. However, the appellant had filed the applications seeking dismissal of the 
Election petition in limine, for the non- compliance of the provisions of Section 83(I)(a) of the 
said Act, read with Order VII, Rule 77 of CPC. 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


23. The law so far developed and settled by this Court with regard to the non-compliance of the 
requirement of Section 83(/)(a) of the EP Act, namely - “an Election petition must contain a concise 
statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies”, is that such non- compliance of Section 
83()(a) read with Order VII, Rule !l, CPC, may entail dismissal of the Election Petition right at the 
threshold. “Material facts” are facts which if established would give the petitioner the relief asked for. 
The test required to be answered is whether the court could have given a direct verdict in favour 
of the election petitioner in case the returned candidate had not appeared to oppose the Election 
petition on the basis of the facts pleaded in the petition. They must be such facts as would afford a 
basis for the allegations made in the petition and would constitute the cause of action as understood in 
the Code of Civil Procedure 908. Material facts would include positive statement of facts 
as also positive statement of a negative fact. 


24. A Three-Judge Bench in Hari Shanker Jain v. Sonia Gandhi (supra) had an occasion to deal 
with Section 63(07)/(6) of the RP Act and the Court dismissed the Election petition holding that the 
bald and vague averments made in the election petitions do not satisfy the requirements of 
pleading “material facts” within the meaning of Section 83(I)(a) of the RP Act read with the 
requirements of Order VII Rule 77 CPC. It was observed in para 23 and 24 as under:— 


“23. Section 83(l)(a) of RPA, 95l mandates that an election petition shall contain a concise 
statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies. By a series of decisions of this 
Court, it is well settled that the material facts required to be stated are those facts which can be 
considered as materials supporting the allegations made. In other words, they must be such facts 
as would afford a basis for the allegations made in the petition and would constitute the 
cause of action as understood in the Civil Procedure Code, 908. The expression “cause of 
action” has been compendiously defined to mean every fact which it would be necessary for the 
plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order to support his right to the judgment of court. Omission 
of a single material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action and the statement of claim 
becomes bad. The function of the party is to present as full a picture of the cause of action 
with such further information in detail as to make the opposite party understand the case he will 
have to meet. (See Samant N. Balkrishna v. George Fernandez [(!969) 3 SCC 238 : (969) 3 
SCR 603], Jitendra Bahadur Singh v. Krishna Behari [(969) 2 SCC 433].) Merely quoting 
the words of the section like chanting of a mantra does not amount to stating material facts. 
Material facts would include positive statement of facts as also positive averment of a negative 
fact, if necessary. In V.S. Achuthanandan v. P.J. Francis [(999) 3 SCC 737] this Court 
has held, on a conspectus of a series of decisions of this Court, that material facts are such 
preliminary facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to establish existence of a cause 
of action. Failure to plead “material facts” is fatal to the election petition and no amendment of 
the pleadings is permissible to introduce such material facts after the time-limit prescribed 
for filing the election petition. 


24. It is the duty of the court to examine the petition irrespective of any written statement or 
denial and reject the petition if it does not disclose a cause of action. To enable a court to reject a 
plaint on the ground that it does not disclose a cause of action, it should look at the plaint and 
nothing else. Courts have always frowned upon vague pleadings which leave a wide scope to 
adduce any evidence. No amount of evidence can cure basic defect in the pleadings.” 


25. In the case of Mahadeorao Sukaji Shivankar vs. Ramaratan Bapu, a Three-Judge Bench of this 
Court again had an occasion to deal with the issues as to what would constitute “material facts” and 
what would be the consequences of not stating the “material facts” in the Election petition, as 
contemplated in Section 63(7)(9) of the Act, and the Court observed as under: 


“6. Now, it is no doubt true that all material facts have to be set out in an election petition. If 
material facts are not stated in a plaint or a petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on 
that ground alone as the case would be covered by clause (a) of Rule l! of Order 7 of the 
Code. The question, however, is as to whether the petitioner had set out material facts in the 
election petition. The expression “material facts” has neither been defined in the Act nor in the 
Code. It may be stated that the material facts are those facts upon which a party relies for his 
claim or defence. In other words, material facts are facts upon which the plaintiff's cause of 
action or the defendant's defence depends. What particulars could be said to be material facts 
would depend upon the facts of each case and no rule of universal application can be laid 
down. It is, however, absolutely essential that all basic and primary facts which must be 
proved at the trial by the party to establish existence of cause of action or defence are material 
facts and must be stated in the pleading of the party. 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 30॥)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण [7 


7. But, it is equally well settled that there is distinction between “material facts” and 
“particulars”. Material facts are primary or basic facts which must be pleaded by the petitioner in 
support of the case set up by him either to prove his cause of action or defence. Particulars, 
on the other hand, are details in support of material facts pleaded by the party. They amplify, 
refine and embellish material facts by giving finishing touch to the basic contours of a picture 
already drawn so as to make it full, more clear and more informative. Particulars ensure conduct 
of fair trial and would not take the opposite party by surprise.” 


26. In the case of Anil Vasudev Salgaonkar vs. Naresh Kushali Shigaonkar, this Court has discussed 
number of earlier decisions on the issue as to when the Election Petition could be dismissed 
summarily, if it does not furnish the cause of action in exercise of powers under the Code of 
Civil Procedure read with Section 83 of the Act. Paragraphs 50 to 58 reads as under: 


“50. The position is well settled that an election petition can be summarily dismissed if it 
does not furnish the cause of action in exercise of the power under the Code of Civil Procedure. 
Appropriate orders in exercise of powers under the Code can be passed if the mandatory 
requirements enjoined by Section 83 of the Act to incorporate the material facts in the election 
petition are not complied with. 


34. This Court in Samant N. Balkrishna case [([969) 3 SCC 238] has expressed itself in no 
uncertain terms that the omission of a single material fact would lead to an incomplete cause 
of action and that an election petition without the material facts relating to a corrupt practice is 
not an election petition at all. In Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia [(977) | SCC 5]] the 
law has been enunciated that all the primary facts which must be proved by a party to 
establish a cause of action or his defence are material facts. In the context of a charge of corrupt 
practice it would mean that the basic facts which constitute the ingredients of the particular 
corrupt practice alleged by the petitioner must be specified in order to succeed on the charge. 
Whether in an election petition a particular fact is material or not and as such required to be 
pleaded is dependent on the nature of the charge levelled and the circumstances of the case. 
All the facts which are essential to clothe the petition with complete cause of action must be 
pleaded and failure to plead even a single material fact would amount to disobedience of the 
mandate of Section 83()(a). An election petition therefore can be and must be dismissed if 
it suffers from any such vice. The first ground of challenge must therefore fail. 


52. In V. Narayanaswamy v. C.P. Thirunavukkarasu [(2000) 2 SCC 294] this Court reiterated 
the legal position that an election petition is liable to be dismissed if it lacks in material facts. In 
L.R. Shivaramagowda 9. T.M. Chandrashekar (999) 7 SCC 666] this Court again 
considered the importance of pleadings in an election petition alleging corrupt practice falling 
within the scope of Section 723 of the Act and observed as under : (SCC p. 677, para /47) 


#“_]|, This Court has repeatedly stressed the importance of pleadings in an election petition and 
pointed out the difference between ‘material facts’ and ‘material particulars’. While the failure to 
plead material facts is fatal to the election petition and no amendment of the pleading could be 
allowed to introduce such material facts after the time-limit prescribed for filing the election 
petition, the absence of material particulars can be cured at a later stage by an appropriate 
amendment.” 


53. या Udhav Singh case (9772) 7 SCC उतग7 this Court observed as under : (SCC pp. 522- 
23, para 44) 


“4]. Like the Code of Civil Procedure, this section also envisages a distinction between ‘material 
facts’ and ‘material particulars’. Clause (a) of sub-section (l) corresponds to Order 6 Rule 2, 
while clause (b) is analogous to Order 6 Rules 4 and 6 of the Code. The distinction between 
‘material facts’ and ‘material particulars’ is important because different consequences may flow 
from a deficiency of such facts or particulars in the pleading. Failure to plead even a single 
material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action and incomplete allegations of such a charge 
are liable to be struck off under Order 6 Rule 6, Code of Civil Procedure. If the petition is based 
solely on those allegations which suffer from lack of material facts, the petition is liable to be 
summarily rejected for want of a cause of action. In the case of a petition suffering from a 
deficiency of material particulars, the court has a discretion to allow the petitioner to supply the 
required particulars even after the expiry of limitation.” 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


54. In H.D. Revanna case [([999) 2 SCC 27] the appeal was filed by the candidate who 
had succeeded in the election and whose application for dismissal of the election petition in 
limine was rejected by the High Court. This Court noticed that it has been laid down by this 
Court that non-compliance with the provisions of Section 83 may lead to dismissal of the petition 
if the matter falls within the scope of Order 6 Rule 6 and Order 7 Rule |! of the Code of Civil 
Procedure. In Harmohinder Singh Pradhan v. Ranjeet Singh Talwandi [(2005) 5 SCC 46] 
this Court observed thus : (SCC p. 34, para 74) 


+ 4. Necessary averment of facts constituting an appeal on the ground of ‘his religion’ to vote or 
to refrain from voting would be material facts within the meaning of clause (a) of sub-section (]) 
of Section 83 of the Act. If such material facts are missing, they cannot be supplied later on, 
after the expiry of period of limitation for filing the election petition and the plea being 
deficient, can be directed to be struck down under Order 6 Rule 6 of the Civil Procedure Code, 
908 and if such plea be the sole ground of filing an election petition, the petition itself can be 
rejected as not disclosing a cause of action under clause (a) of Rule Il, Order 7 of the Code.” 


55. In Harkirat Singh v. Amrinder Singh [(2005) 73 SCC उ77॥7 this Court again reiterated the 
distinction between “material facts” and “material particulars” and observed as under : (SCC 
7. 527, paras 34-52) 


#5], A distinction between ‘material facts’ and ‘particulars’, however, must not be overlooked. 
‘Material facts’ are primary or basic facts which must be pleaded by the plaintiff or by the 
defendant in support of the case set up by him either to prove his cause of action or defence. 
‘Particulars’, on the other hand, are details in support of material facts pleaded by the party. 
They amplify, refine and embellish material facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic 
contours of a picture already drawn so as to make it full, more clear and more informative. 
‘Particulars’ thus ensure conduct of fair trial and would not take the opposite party by 
surprise. 


52. All ‘material facts’ must be pleaded by the party in support of the case set up by him. 
Since the object and purpose is to enable the opposite party to know the case he has to meet 
with, in the absence of pleading, a party cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even 
a single material fact, hence, will entail dismissal of the suit or petition. Particulars, on the other 
hand, are the details of the case which is in the nature of evidence a party would be leading at 
the time of trial.” 


56. In Sudarsha Avasthi v. Shiv Pal Singh [(2008) 7 SCC 604] this Court observed as under : 
(SCC p. 672, para 20) “20. The election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be treated 
lightly or in a fanciful manner nor is it given to a person who uses this as a handle for 
vexatious purpose.” 


57. It is settled legal position that all “material facts” must be pleaded by the party in 
support of the case set up by him within the period of limitation. Since the object and purpose is 
to enable the opposite party to know the case he has to meet with, in the absence of pleading, a 
party cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even a single material fact will entail 
dismissal of the election petition. The election petition must contain a concise statement of 
“material facts” on which the petitioner relies. 


58. There is no definition of “material facts” either in the Representation of the People Act, 
4954 nor in the Code of Civil Procedure. In a series of judgments, this Court has laid down that 
all facts necessary to formulate a complete cause of action should be termed as “material 
facts”. All basic and primary facts which must be proved by a party to establish the existence of 
cause of action or defence are material facts. “Material facts” in other words mean the entire 
bundle of facts which would constitute a complete cause of action. This Court in Harkirat Singh 
case [(2005) 73 SCC 5/]] tried to give various meanings of “material facts”. The relevant para 
48 of the said judgment is reproduced as under : (SCC pp. 526-27) 


“48. The expression ‘material facts’ has neither been defined in the Act nor in the Code. 
According to the dictionary meaning, ‘material’ means ‘fundamental’, ‘vital’, ‘basic’, ‘cardinal’, 
‘central’, ‘crucial’, ‘decisive’, ‘essential’, ‘pivotal’, ‘indispensable’, ‘elementary’ or ‘primary’. 
[Burton's Legal Thesaurus (3४ Edn.), 9. 349.] The phrase ‘material facts’, therefore, may 
be said to be those facts upon which a party relies for its claim or defence. In other words, 
‘material facts’ are facts upon which the plaintiff's cause of action or the defendant's defence 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 9 


depends. What particulars could be said to be ‘material facts’ would depend upon the facts of 
each case and no rule of universal application can be laid down. It is, however, absolutely 
essential that all basic and primary facts which must be proved at the trial by the party to 
establish the existence of a cause of action or defence are material facts and must be stated in the 
pleading by the party.” 


27. In the case of Ram Sukh v. Dinesh Aggarwal (supra), this Court again while examining the 
maintainability of Election petition filed under Section l00(I)(d)(iv) of the Act, elaborately 
considered the earlier decisions and observed that it was necessary for the election petitioner to 
aver specifically in what manner the result of the election insofar as it concerned the Returned 
Candidate was materially affected due to omission on the part of the Returning Officer. The Court in 
the said case having found that such averments being missing in the Election petition, upheld the 
judgment of the High Court/Election Tribunal rejecting the Election petition at the threshold. The 
Court observed in paragraphs 4 to 27 as under:— 


“]4, The requirement in an election petition as to the statement of material facts and the 
consequences of lack of such disclosure with reference to Sections 8l, 83 and 86 of the Act 
came up for consideration before a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Samant N. Balkrishna v. 
George Fernandez [(969) 3 SCC 238]. Speaking for the three-Judge Bench, M. Hidayatullah, 
C.J., inter alia, laid down that: 


(i) Section 83 of the Act is mandatory and requires first a concise statement of material 
facts and then the fullest possible particulars; 


(ii) omission of even a single material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action and statement 
of claim becomes bad; 


(iii) the function of particulars is to present in full a picture of the cause of action and to 
make the opposite party understand the case he will have to meet; 


(iv) material facts and particulars are distinct matters— material facts will mention 
statements of fact and particulars will set out the names of persons with date, time and place; 
and 


(v.) in stating the material facts it will not do merely to quote the words of the section 
because then the efficacy of the material facts will be lost. 


I5. At this juncture, in order to appreciate the real object and purport of the phrase “material 
facts”, particularly with reference to election law, it would be appropriate to notice the 
distinction between the phrases “material facts” as appearing in clause (a) and “particulars” as 
appearing in clause (b) of sub-section 


() of Section 83. As stated above, “material facts” are primary or basic facts which have to be 
pleaded by the petitioner to prove his cause of action and by the defendant to prove his defence. 
“Particulars”, on the other hand, are details in support of the material facts, pleaded by the parties. 
They amplify, refine and embellish material facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic 
contours of a picture already drawn so as to make it full, more clear and more informative. Unlike 
“material facts” which provide the basic foundation on which the entire edifice of the election 
petition is built, “particulars” are to be stated to ensure that the opposite party is not taken by 
surprise. 


46. The distinction between “material facts” and “particulars” and their requirement in an 
election petition was succinctly brought out by this Court in Virender Nath Gautam v. Satpal Singh 
[(2007) 3 SCC 6I7] wherein C.K. Thakker, J., stated thus : (SCC pp. 637-32, para 50) 


“50. There is distinction between facta probanda (the facts required to be proved i.e. material 
facts) and facta probantia (the facts by means of which they are proved i.e. particulars or 
evidence). It is settled law that pleadings must contain only facta probanda and not facta 
probantia. The material facts on which the party relies for his claim are called facta probanda and 
they must be stated in the pleadings. But the facts or facts by means of which facta probanda 
(material facts) are proved and which are in the nature of facta probantia (particulars or evidence) 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


need not be set out in the pleadings.They are not facts in issue, but only relevant facts 
required to be proved at the trial in order to establish the fact in issue.” 


37... Now, before examining the rival submissions in the light of the aforestated legal 
position, it would be expedient to deal with another submission of the learned counsel for the 
appellant that the High Court should not have exercised its power either under Order 6 Rule 
46 or Order 7 Rule य7 of the Code to reject the election petition at the threshold. The 
argument is twofold viz.: 


(i) that even if the election petition was liable to be dismissed ultimately, it should have been 
dismissed only after affording an opportunity to the election petitioner to adduce evidence in 
support of his allegation in the petition, and 


(ii) since Section 83 does not find a place in Section 66 of the Act, rejection of the petition 
at the threshold would amount to reading into sub-section (/) of Section 86 an additional 
ground. 


In our opinion, both the contentions are misconceived and untenable. 


46... Undoubtedly, by virtue of Section 87 of the Act, the provisions of the Code apply to the 
trial of an election petition and, therefore, in the absence of anything to the contrary in the Act, 
the court trying an election petition can act in exercise of its power under the Code, including 
Order 6 Rule 76 and Order 7 Rule मय of the Code. The object of both the provisions is to ensure 
that meaningless litigation, which is otherwise bound to prove abortive, should not be permitted 
to occupy the judicial time of the courts. If that is so in matters pertaining to ordinary civil 
litigation, it must apply with greater vigour in election matters where the pendency of an 
election petition is likely to inhibit the elected representative of the people in the discharge of his 
public duties for which the electorate have reposed confidence in him. The submission, therefore, 
must fail. 


49... Coming to the second limb of the argument viz. absence of Section 83 in Section 86 of the 
Act, which specifically provides for dismissal of an election petition which does not comply 
with certain provisions of the Act, in our view, the issue is no longer res integra. A similar plea 
was negatived by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Hardwari Lal v. Kanwal Singh [((972) | 
SCC 24], wherein speaking for the Bench, A.N. Ray, J. (as His Lordship then was) said : (SCC 
p. 224, para 23) 


“23. Counsel on behalf of the respondent submitted that an election petition could not be 
dismissed by reason of want of material facts because Section 86 of the Act conferred power on 
the High Court to dismiss the election petition which did not comply with the provisions of 
Section 8l, or Section 82 or Section [[7 of the Act. It was emphasised that Section 83 did not 
find place in Section 86. Under Section 87 of the Act every election petition shall be tried by the 
High Court as nearly as may be in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Civil 
Procedure Code, 908, to the trial of suits. A suit which does not furnish cause of action 
can be dismissed.” 


20. The issue was again dealt with by this Court in Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi (/966 Supp 
SCC 3I5]. Referring to earlier pronouncements of this Court in Samant N. Balkrishna (969) 
3 SCC 238] and Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia [(l977) | SCC 5l] wherein it was 
observed that the omission of a single material fact would lead to incomplete cause of action and 
that an election petition without the material facts is not an election petition at all, the Bench in 
Azhar Hussain case [[986 Supp SCC 35] held that all the facts which are essential to clothe the 
petition with complete cause of action must be pleaded and omission of even a single 
material fact would amount to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(l)(a) of the Act and 
an election petition can be and must be dismissed if it suffers from any such vice. 


24... ज€ may now advert to the facts at hand to examine whether the election petition suffered 
from the vice of non-disclosure of material facts as stipulated in Section 83(I)(a) of the Act. 
As already stated the case of the election petitioner is confined to the alleged violation of Section 
॥007)/(4)(7). For the sake of ready reference, the said provision is extracted below: 


“+]00, Grounds for declaring election to be void.— 


(7). Subject to the provisions of sub-section 


[भाग —e@ve 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 2] 


(2) if the High Court is of opinion— 


ook aK 


(d) that the result of the election, insofar as it concerns a returned candidate, has been 
materially affected— 


ook aK 


(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of any rules 
or orders made under this Act, the High Court shall declare the election of the returned 
candidate to be void.” 


It is plain that in order to get an election declared as void under the said provision, the election 
petitioner must aver that on account of non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or 
of this Act or of any rules or orders made under the Act, the result of the election, insofar as it 
concerned the returned candidate, was materially affected.” 


28. The legal position enunciated in afore-stated cases may be summed up as under:— 


i. Section 53(7)(6) of RP Act, l95] mandates that an Election petition shall contain a concise 
statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies. If material facts are not stated in 
an Election petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone, as the case 
would be covered by Clause (a) of Rule 77 of Order 7 of the Code. 


ii. The material facts must be such facts as would afford a basis for the allegations made in the 
petition and would constitute the cause of action, that is every fact which it would be necessary 
for the plaintiff/petitioner to prove, if traversed in order to support his right to the judgment of 
court. Omission of a single material fact would lead to an incomplete cause of action and 
the statement of plaint would become bad. 


iii. Material facts mean the entire bundle of facts which would constitute a complete cause of 
action. Material facts would include positive statement of facts as also positive averment of a 
negative fact, if necessary. 


iv. In order to get an election declared as void under Section 700/)(4)(69) of the RP Act, the 
Election petitioner must aver that on account of non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of the Act or any rules or orders made under the Act, the result of the election, 
in so far as it concerned the returned candidate, was materially affected. 


v. The Election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be treated lightly or in a fanciful 
manner nor is it given to a person who uses it as a handle for vexatious purpose. 


vi. An Election petition can be summarily dismissed on the omission of a single material fact 
leading to an incomplete cause of action, or omission to contain a concise statement of material 
facts on which the petitioner relies for establishing a cause of action, in exercise of the powers 
under Clause (a) of Rule 77 Order VII CPC read with the mandatory requirements enjoined by 
Section 83 of the RP Act." 


23. It is also relevant to cite the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Karim Uddin Barbhuiya vs. 
Aminul Haque Laskar and Others reported in 2024 SCC Online SC 509 at paragraphs 2 to l6 and 9 to 24 it 
is held that, 


"2. At the outset, it may be noted that as per the well settled legal position, right to contest 
election or to question the election by means of an Election Petition is neither common law nor 
fundamental right. It is a statutory right governed by the statutory provisions of the RP Act. 
Outside the statutory provisions, there is no right to dispute an election. The RP Act is a complete and 
self-contained code within which any rights claimed in relation to an election or an election dispute 
must be found. The provisions of Civil Procedure Code are applicable to the extent as permissible 
under Section 87 of the RP Act. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


I3. It hardly needs to be reiterated that in an Election Petition, pleadings have to be precise, 
specific and unambiguous, and if the Election Petition does not disclose a cause of action, it is 
liable to be dismissed in limine. It may also be noted that the cause of action in questioning the 
validity of election must relate to the grounds specified in Section 799 of the RP Act. As held in 
Bhagwati Prasad Dixit ‘Ghorewala’ v. Rajeev Gandhi and in Dhartipakar Madan Lal Agarwal v. 
Rajiv Gandhi, if the allegations contained in the petition do not set out the grounds as contemplated 
by Section 790 and do not conform to the requirement of Section 5 and 83 of the Act, the pleadings 
are liable to be struck off and the Election Petition is liable to be rejected under Order VII, Rule I] 
CPC. 


4... A beneficial reference of the decision in case of Laxmi Narayan Nayak v. Ramratan Chaturvedi 
be also made, wherein this Court upon review of the earlier decisions, laid down following 
principles applicable to election cases involving corrupt practices:— 


“5S. This Court in a catena of decisions has laid down the principles as to the nature of 
pleadings in election cases, the sum and substance of which being: 


(7). The pleadings of the election petitioner in his petition should be absolutely precise and 
clear containing all necessary details and particulars as required by law vide Dhartipakar 
Madan Lal Agarwal v. Rajiv Gandhi (/987 Supp SCC 93] and Kona Prabhakara Rao 9. M. 
Seshagiri Rao ((/962) / SCC 442]. 


(2) The allegations in the election petition should not be vague, general in nature or lacking of 
materials or frivolous or vexatious because the court is empowered at any stage of the 
proceedings to strike down or delete pleadings which are suffering from such vices as not 
raising any triable issue vide Manphul Singh v. Surinder Singh (973) 2 SCC 599 : (:9/4) 
I SCR 52], Kona Prabhakara Rao v. M. Seshagiri Rao [(982) | SCC 442] and Dhartipakar 
Madan Lal Agarwal v. Rajiv Gandhi [l987 Supp SCC 93]. 


(3) The evidence adduced in support of the pleadings should be of such nature leading to an 
irresistible conclusion or unimpeachable result that the allegations made, have been 
committed rendering the election void under Section !00 vide Jumuna Prasad Mukhariya v. 
Lachhi Ram [(954) 2 SCC 306 : (955) SCR 608 : AIR 4954 SC 686] and Rahim Khan 
v. Khurshid Ahmed [(974) 2 SCC 660]. 


(4) The evidence produced before the court in support of the pleadings must be clear, cogent, 
satisfactory, credible and positive and also should stand the test of strict and scrupulous 
scrutiny vide Ram Sharan Yadav v. Thakur Muneshwar Nath Singh [(984) 4 SCC 649]. 


(5) It is unsafe in an election case to accept oral evidence at its face value without looking for 
assurances for some surer circumstances or unimpeachable documents vide Rahim Khan 9. 
Khurshid Ahmed ((/9/4) 2 SCC 660], M. Narayana Rao v. G. Venkata Reddy [(977) | 
SCC 77 : ((977) l SCR 490], Lakshmi Raman Acharya v. Chandan Singh [(977) l SCC 
423 : (977) 2 SCR 42] and Ramji Prasad Singh v. Ram Bilas Jha [(977) | SCC 260]." 


(6) The onus of proof of the allegations made in the election petition is undoubtedly on the 
person who assails an election which has been concluded vide Rahim Khan v. Khurshid Ahmed 
(924) 2 SCC 660], Mohan Singh v. Bhanwarlal (7964) 5 SCR 72 : AIR 7964 SC I366] and 
Ramji Prasad Singh v. Ram Bilas Jha (997) ] SCC 260].” 


ऊँ, The legal position with regard to the non-compliance of the requirement of Section 653(4)(५) 
of the RP Act and_ the rejection of Election Petition under Order VII Rule 77, CPC has also been 
regurgitated recently by this Court in case of Kanimozhi Karunanidhi v. A. Santhana Kumar 
(supra):— 


“28. The legal position enunciated in afore-stated cases may be summed up as under:— 


i. Section 63(7)(6) of RP Act, ॥9547 mandates that an Election petition shall contain a concise 
statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies. If material facts are not stated in 
an Election petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone, as the case 
would be covered by Clause (a) of Rule 77 of Order 7 of the Code. 


[भाग ere 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


ii The material facts must be such facts as would afford a basis for the allegations made in 
the petition and would constitute the cause of action, that is every fact which it would be 
necessary for the plaintiff/petitioner to prove, if traversed in order to support his right to the 
judgment of court. Omission of a single material fact would lead to an incomplete cause of 
action and the statement of plaint would become bad. 


iii. Material facts mean the entire bundle of facts which would constitute a complete cause 
of action. Material facts would include positive statement of facts as also positive averment of 
a negative fact, if necessary. 


iv. In order to get an election declared as void under Section 7/007)(4)(87) of the RP Act, the 
Election petitioner must aver that on account of non-compliance with the provisions of the 
Constitution or of the Act or any rules or orders made under the Act, the result of the election, 
in so far as it concerned the returned candidate, was materially affected. 


v. The Election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be treated lightly or in a fanciful 
manner nor is it given to a person who uses it as a handle for vexatious purpose. 


vi. An Election petition can be summarily dismissed on the omission of a single material fact 
leading to an incomplete cause of action, or omission to contain a concise statement of material 
facts on which the petitioner relies for establishing a cause of action, in exercise of the powers 
under Clause (a) of Rule 77 Order VII CPC read with the mandatory requirements enjoined by 
Section 83 of the RP Act.” 


46... Bearing in mind the aforestated legal position, let us consider the averments and allegations 
made by the respondent no. I in the Election Petition in which the election of the Appellant is sought 
to be challenged basically on two grounds : (/) that the appellant has committed corrupt practice and 
(2) the result of the election in so far as it concerned the appellant, was materially affected by the 
improper acceptance of his nomination. In short, the respondent no. I has invoked Section 700(4)(8) 
and Section 700/)(4)6) of the Act, for declaring the election of the Appellant as void. 


* ok Ok 


49, Now, from the bare reading of the Election petition, it emerges that the respondent no. I has 
made only bald and vague allegations in the Election Petition without stating the material facts in 
support thereof as required to be stated under Section 63(7)(6) of the RP Act. Apart from the 
fact that none of the allegations with regard to the false statements, and suppression and 
misrepresentation of facts allegedly made by the respondent no. 4 with regard to his educational 
qualification or with regard to his liability in respect of the loan availed by him for his partnership 
firm or with regard to his default in depositing the employer's contribution to provident fund, would 
fall within the definition of “Corrupt practice” of “undue influence” as envisaged in Section /23(2) 
of the RP Act, the Election petition also lacks concise statement of “material facts” as contemplated 
in Section 83(a), and lacks “full particulars” of the alleged Corrupt practice as contemplated in 
Section 83(b) of the RP Act. 


20. So far as the allegations of “Corrupt practice” are concerned, the respondent no. | was required 
to make concise statement of material facts as to how the appellant had indulged into “Corrupt 
practice” of undue influence by directly or indirectly interfering or attempted to interfere with the free 
exercise of any electoral right. Mere bald and vague allegations without any basis would not be 
sufficient compliance of the requirement of making a concise statement of the “material facts” in the 
Election Petition. The material facts which are primary and basic facts have to be pleaded in support 
of the case set up by the Election petitioner to show his cause of action. Any omission of a single 
material fact would lead to an incomplete cause of action entitling the returned candidate to pray 
for dismissal of Election petition under Order VII Rule |(a) of CPC read with Section 83(|)(9) of the 
RP Act. The said legal position has been well settled by this Court in Azhar Hussain v. Rajiv 
Gandhi, wherein this Court after referring to the earlier pronouncements in Samant N. Balkrishna v. 
George Fernandez and Shri Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia, observed that the omission of a 
single material fact would lead to incomplete cause of action, and that an Election petition without 
the material facts is not an Election petition at all. It was further held that all the facts which are 
essential to clothe the petition with complete cause of action must be pleaded and omission of even a 
single material fact would amount to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(l)(a) of 
the Act and an Election petition can be and must be dismissed, if it suffers from any such vice. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


247... 7४8 also pertinent to note at this juncture that a charge of “Corrupt practice” is easy to level 
but difficult to prove because it is in the nature of criminal charge and has got to be proved 
beyond doubt. The standard of proof required for establishing a charge of “Corrupt practice” is the 
same as is applicable to a criminal charge. Therefore, Section 63(7)(09) mandates that when the 
allegation of “Corrupt practice” is made, the Election Petition shall set forth full particulars of the 
corrupt practice that the Election Petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the 
names of parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the 
commission of each such practice. The pleadings with regard to the allegation of corrupt practice 
have to be precise, specific and unambiguous whether it is bribery or undue influence or other 
corrupt practices as stated in Section 723 of the Act. If it is corrupt practice in the nature of 
undue influence, the pleadings must state the full particulars with regard to the direct or indirect 
interference or attempt to interfere by the candidate, with the free exercise of any electoral right 
as stated in Section 723(2) of the Act. We are afraid, Mr. Gupta has failed to point out from the 
pleadings of the Election petition as to how the appellant had interfered or attempted to interfere 
with the free exercise of any electoral right so as to constitute “undue influence” under Section 


23(2) of the Act. 


22. So far as the ground contained in clause (व) of Section 7099) of the Act, with regard to 
improper acceptance of the nomination of the Appellant is concerned, there is not a single averment 
made in the Election Petition as to how the result of the election, in so far as the appellant was 
concerned, was materially affected by improper acceptance of his nomination, so as to constitute a 
cause of action under Section 70074) of the Act. Though it is true that the Election Petitioner is 
not required to state as to how corrupt practice had materially affected the result of the election, 
nonetheless it is mandatory to state when the clause (d)(i) of Section 7099) is invoked as to how the 
result of election was materially affected by improper acceptance of the nomination form of the 
Appellant. 


23. As transpiring from the Election Petition, the respondent no. | himself had not raised any 
objection in writing against the nomination filed by the Appellant, at the time of scrutiny made by 
the Returning Officer under Section 36 of the Act. According to him, he had raised oral objection 
with regard to the education qualification stated by the Appellant in the Affidavit in Form-26. If he 
could make oral objection, he could as well, have made objection in writing against the acceptance of 
nomination of the Appellant, and in that case the Returning Officer would have decided his objection 
under sub-section (2) of Section 36, after holding a summary inquiry. Even if it is accepted that he had 
raised an oral objection with regard to the educational qualification of the Appellant before the 
Returning Officer at the time of scrutiny, the respondent no. | has failed to make averment in the 
Election Petition as to how Appellant's nomination was liable to be rejected by the Returning Officer 
on the grounds mentioned in Section 36(2) of the Act, so as to make his case fall under clause (d)(i) of 
Section l00(l) that there was improper acceptance of the nomination of the Appellant. The non- 
mentioning of the particulars as to how such improper acceptance of nomination had materially 
affected the result of the election, is apparent on the face of the Election Petition. 


24. As stated earlier, in Election Petition, the pleadings have to be precise, specific and 
unambiguous. If the allegations contained in Election Petition do not set out grounds as contemplated 
in Section 4909 and do not conform to the requirement of Section 57 and 83 of the Act, the Election 
Petition is liable to be rejected under Order VII, Rule I] of CPC. An omission of a_ single 
material fact leading to an incomplete cause of action or omission to contain a concise statement of 
material facts on which the Election petitioner relies for establishing a cause of action, would entail 
rejection of Election Petition under Order VII Rule व read with Section 83 and 87 of the RP 
Act." 


24 In the light of the dictum of the Hon'ble Supreme Court referred to above, I have carefully considered 


the verification paragraph mentioned in the Election petition by the petitioner, stated at page No. 26 of the 
Election Petition and in this regard, it is relevant to extract Order VI Rule 45 of CPC which reads as under: 


“Order 6, Rule 5 CPC 


45. Verification of pleadings. 


(). Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force, every pleading shall be 
varied at the foot by the party or by one of the parties pleading or by some other person proved to the 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


satisfaction of the Court to be acquainted with the facts of the case. 


(2) The person verifying shall specify, by reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what 
he verifies of his own knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be 
true. 


(3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it and_shall_state_ the date on_which_and 
the_place_at_which_it was signed.” 


(Emphasis supplied) 


25 The language employed in Order VI Rule 5 (3) of CPC, wherein the word “shall”, reflects that, the 
said compliance of providing details in the verification paragraph is mandatory. On careful examination of the 
verification appended to the Election Petition at paragraph 26 of the Election petition, the learned counsel for the 
respondent is justified in submitting that, the verification paragraph do not contain the place and date as 
required under Order VI Rule 5(3) of CPC. Though it is a procedural requirement by the petitioner /plaintiff to 
rectify the same, by filing afresh affidavit/verification to cure the procedural defect in filing the Election Petition 
and following the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Salem Advocate Bar Association, Tamil 
Nadu vs. Union of India reported in AIR 2003 SC I89, wherein, an opportunity has to be extended to the petitioner to 
cure the said defect, however, same has not been complied with by the petitioner herein and therefore, I find force in 
the submission made by the learned counsel for the respondent that, the Election Petition has been filed without 
removing defects and callousness, in filing the petition so also, to harass the respondent-the Returned Candidate. 


26. In the case of Krishnamoorthy (supra) the Hon’ble Supreme Court after considering entire gamet of 
law relating to disclosure of antecedents of candidate, at paragraphs 20, 94 held as follows: 


“20.Dharmadhikari, J. in his supplementing opinion, observed thus: 


"27. The reports of the advisory commissions set up one after the other by the Government to which a 
reference has been made by Brother Shah, J., highlight the present political scenario where 
money power and muscle power have substantially polluted and perverted the democratic 
processes in India. To control the ill- effects of money power and muscle power the commissions 
recommend that election system should be overhauled and drastically changed lest democracy 
would become a teasing illusion to common citizens of this country. Not only a half-hearted 
attempt in the direction of reform of the election system is to be taken, as has been done by the 
present legislation by amending some provisions of the Act here and there, but a much 
improved elections system is required to be evolved to make the election process both transparent 
and accountable so that influence of tainted money and physical force of criminals do not make 
democracy a farce - the citizen's fundamental "right to information" should be recognised and 
fully effectuated. This freedom of a citizen to participate and choose a candidate at an election 
is distinct from exercise of his right as a voter which is to be regulated by statutory law on the 
election like the RP Act." 


94. In view of the above, we would like to sum up our conclusions: 


94.I Disclosure of criminal antecedents of a candidate, especially, pertaining to heinous or serious 
offence or offences relating to corruption or moral turpitude at the time of filing of nomination 
paper as mandated by law is a categorical imperative. 


94.2 When there is non-disclosure of the offences pertaining to the areas mentioned in the 
preceding clause, it creates an impediment in the free exercise of electoral right. 


94.3 Concealment or suppression of this nature deprives the voters to make an informed and 
advised choice as aconsequence of which it would come within the compartment of direct or 
indirect interference or attempt to interfere with the free exercise of the right to vote by the 
electorate, on the part of the candidate. 


94.4 48 the candidate has the special knowledge of the pending cases where cognizance has been 
taken or charges have been framed and there is a non-disclosure on his part, it would amount to 
undue influence and, therefore, the election is to be declared null and void by the Election 
Tribunal under Section 70098) of the 7957 Act. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


94.5. The question whether it materially affects the election or not will not arise in a case of this 
nature." 


27. In the case of C.P.John (supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court at paragraphs 8 to 20 and 38 held as follows: 


“I8.When we read Section 83, the substantive part of Section 83(.) consists of three 
important elements, namely, that an Election Petition should contain a concise statement of material 
facts which an election petitioner relies upon. The emphasis is on the material facts which should be 
stated in a concise form. Under Section 83(])(b) it is stipulated that the Election Petition should set 
forth full particulars of any corrupt practice which is alleged by the petitioner. A reading of the said sub- 
clause 83(l)(b) is to the effect that such particulars should be complete in every respect and when it 
relates to an allegation of corrupt practice it should specifically state the names of the parties who 
alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and also the date and place where such corrupt practice 
was committed. In other words, the particulars relating to corrupt practice should not be lacking in any 
respect. One who reads the averments relating to corrupt practice should be in a position to gather 
every minute detail about the alleged corrupt practice such as the names of the persons, the nature of 
the alleged corrupt practice indulged in by such person or persons, the place, the date, the time and 
every other detail relating to the alleged corrupt practice. 


49. To put it differently, when the Election Petition is taken up for consideration, the Court which 
deals with such an Election Petition, should be in a position to know in exactitude as to what is the 
corrupt practice alleged as against the parties without giving any room for doubt as to the nature of 
such allegation, the parties involved, the date, time and the place etc. so that the party against 
whom such allegation is made is in a position to explain or defend any such allegation without giving 
scope for any speculation. In that context, both Sections 63(7)(6) and (7)(9) and the proviso play a 
very key role since the election petitioner cannot simply raise an allegation of corrupt practice and 
get away with it, inasmuch as the affidavit to be filed in respect of corrupt practice should specifically 
support the facts pleaded, as well as, the material particulars furnished. Rule 94A of the Rules in turn 
stipulates that the affidavit should be in the prescribed Form 25 and should be sworn before the 
Magistrate of Ist class or a notary or the Commissioner of Oaths and makes it mandatory for the 
election petitioner to comply with the said requirement statutorily. The format of the affidavit as 
prescribed in FORM25 elaborates as to the requirement of specifically mentioning the paragraphs 
where the statement of facts are contained and also the other paragraphs where material particulars 
relating to such corrupt practices are alleged. It also mentions as to which of those statement of 
facts and material particulars are based on the personal knowledge of the election petitioner and such 
of those statements and particulars that are made based on the information gained by the election 
petitioner. 


20. Therefore, a conspectus’ reading of Section 83(.)(a) read along with its proviso of the 
Act, as well as, Rule 94A and FORM 25 of the Rules make the legal position clear that in the filing of 
an Election Petition challenging the successful election of a candidate, the election petitioner 
should take extra care and leave no room for doubt while making any allegation of corrupt practice 
indulged in by the successful candidate and that he cannot be later on heard to state that the 
allegations were generally spoken to or as discussed sporadically and on that basis the petition 
came to be filed. In other words, unless and until the election petitioner comes forward with a 
definite plea of his case that the allegation of corrupt practice is supported by legally acceptable material 
evidence without an iota of doubt as to such allegation, the Election Petition cannot be entertained and 
will have to be rejected at the threshold. It will be relevant to state that since the successful candidate in 
an election has got the support of the majority of the voters who cast their votes in his favour, the 
success gained by a candidate in a public election cannot be allowed to be called in question by any 
unsuccessful candidate by making frivolous or baseless allegations and thereby unnecessarily drag the 
successful candidate to the Court proceedings and make waste of his precious time, which would have 
otherwise been devoted for the welfare of the members of his constituency. Therefore, while deciding 
the issue raised, we wish to keep in mind the above lofty ideas, with which the provisions contained 
in Section 83(l) read along with Section 86 came to be incorporated while deciding this 
appeal.” 


38. There can be no two opinions that consequences envisaged by Section 86() of the Act will have 
no application to the non-compliance with Section 83(l) or (2) or its proviso. But the question 
before us is when the mandatory requirement of the pleadings as stipulated under Section 83() and 
its proviso was brought to the notice of the appellant, as well as, to the Court, and when a specific 


[भाग ave 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


28. 


application was filed for rejecting the election petition for want of particulars and consequent lack of 
cause of action for maintaining the election and the election petitioner, namely, the appellant herein 
chose not to cure the defects but insisted that his election petition can be proceeded with keeping the 
material defects on record, he cannot later on be heard to state that at any later point of time he must 
be given an opportunity to set right the defects. We are unable to appreciate such an extreme stand 
made on behalf of the appellant. Therefore, even while applying the above proposition of law 
stated by this Court in para 7 of G. Mallikarjunappa case, we do not find any scope to interfere 
with the order impugned in these appeals.” 


In the case of Senthil Balaji Vs. A. P. Geetha reported in (2023) SCC Online 679, the Hon'ble 


Supreme Court at paragraph 6 held as_ follows: 


“]6, The consensus of judicial opinion is that the failure to plead material facts concerning alleged 
corrupt practice is fatal to the election petition. The material facts are the primary facts which must be 
proved on trial by a party to establish the existence of a cause of action. In the present case, 
taking the averments made in the petition as it is, not a single material fact is pleaded making 
out an allegation of corrupt practice covered by Section 23 of the RP Act of 95]. All that the 
first respondent has pleaded is that he made representations to the Returning Officer and other 
authorities complaining about the corrupt practice on the part of the appellant. What is the nature of 
the corrupt practice is not mentioned even in brief. Therefore, material facts, which according to 
the first respondent constitute corrupt practice were not pleaded in the Election Petition.” 


29. In the Election Petition, the petitioner has mentioned at paragraph 42 as to details of prior criminal 
proceedings. It is as follows: 


Sl. | Court and Involvement of Disposal Date 
No. | Case Number Respondent No. | 
L. PCR 30/209 Respondent No. ! Disposed on 7.03.202I. 
Before CCH 9l, VX Additional arrayed as Accused No.| 
City Civil and Sessions Judge, 
Bengaluru 
2. Criminal Petition No.68!5 of 20l9 | Respondent No.l! was_ the Disposed on 0.0.2020 
before the Hon’ble High Court of | Petitioner a sought 
Geeta quashing of PCR 
30/209 
3. Special C 865/209 Respondent No. Was} Disposed on 02.!2.2020 
Before CCH82 LXXXI ADDL] @ttayed as Accused No.! 
CITY CIVIL AND 
SESSIONS JUDGE 
4. Criminal Petition No.4555 of 20l7 | Respondent २०. was arrayed) Disposed on 5.06.20l7 
before the Hon’ble High Court of] 25 Respondent therein 
Karnataka, at 
Bengaluru 
a FPA-PMLA- 636/BNG/20i4 And} Respondent No.l Was the} Disposed on 22.06.207 
FPA-PMLA- 588/BNG/204 Appellant in the _ said 
before the Appellate Tribunal For| Proceedings 
Prevention of Money Laundering 
Act 
ie FPA-PMLA- 227/BNG/207 Respondent No. | Disposed on 8.06.208 
Before the Appellate Tribunal For Was the Appellant in the said 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act.) proceedings 
a, WP. 26622/20l4 (GM-RES) Before) Respondent No. | was the} Disposed on 25.06.204 
the Hon’ble High Court ofj Petitioner in the _ said 
Karnataka, Bengaluru proceeding 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


30. Section 33-A of the Act, reads as under: 
“33A. Right to information. 


(7) A candidate shall, apart from any information which he is required to furnish, under this Act or 
the rules made thereunder, in his nomination paper delivered under sub- section (7) of section 33, also 
furnish the information as to whether— 


(i) he is accused of any offence punishable with imprisonment for two years or more in_a pending 
case in which a charge has been framed by the court of competent jurisdiction; 


(ii) he has been convicted of an offence other than any offence referred to in sub-section (4) or sub- 
section (2), or covered in sub-section (3), of section § and sentenced to imprisonment for one year or 
more. 


(2) The candidate or his proposer, as the case may be, shall, at the time of delivering to the 
returning officer the nomination paper under sub-section (7) of section 33, also deliver to him an 
affidavit sworn by the candidate in a prescribed form verifying the information specified in 
sub- section (3). 


(3) The returning officer shall, as soon as may be after the furnishing of information to him under sub- 
section ([), display the aforesaid information by affixing a copy of the affidavit, delivered under sub- 
section (2), at a conspicuous place at his office for the information of the electors relating to a 
constituency for which the nomination paper is delivered. 


3l. Perusal of the language employed in Section 33-A (l)(i) of the Act, requires only pending cases is to 
be disclosed in which charge has been framed and punishment is more than two years. Applying the aforementioned 
provision to the case on hand, the petitioner has referred to the proceedings in MSA No.I2 of 208 and the said case 
has not been mentioned in FORM 26 Affidavit. In the case of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and Others Vs. Union of 
India and Others in Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.4634 of 204 disposed off on 27.07.2022, it is held that, as 
the special mechanism has been envisaged under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002, the proceedings will 
be ended with attachment of property and no penal action to be taken against the respondent-accused therein and 
same has [0 be considered as in the nature of civil proceedings and therefore, the contention raised by the 
learned Senior Counsel for the appellant cannot be accepted. 


32. On careful examination of page 42 of the Election Petition, wherein S].No.l- in PCR 30 of 209, the 
criminal case was disposed off on 7.03.202l. The said judgment in PCR No.30 of 20l9 was questioned before 
this Court in Criminal Petition No.68l5 of 20l9 which came to be disposed off on 0I.0.2020. The Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in the case of Union of India Vs. Association for Democratic Reforms and Another with Peoples 
Union for Civil Liberties and Another Vs. Union of India and Another reported in AIR 2002 SC 2772, laid down 
the guidelines relating to furnishing the antecedents of the candidates and pursuant to the same the Election 
Commission of India has issued Circular dated 0.0.208 specifically stated that, the candidates at elections to the 
Houses of Parliament and Houses of State Legislature have to furnish pending cases or cases of conviction in 
passed and to the political parties that set up such candidates. The said circular has been issued in terms of the 
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, wherein, it is clearly stated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that, the 
candidates has to furnish pending criminal cases and cases in which order of conviction is passed against him/her. 
Insofar as the contention with regard to not disclosing proceedings in PCR No.55750 of 206, private complaint filed 
by one Roshan Beig against the respondent was dismissed for non-prosecution and thereafter, same was restored as 
per the order dated 5.06.207 of this Court and in this regard, the respondent has neither received notice not aware 
about the revival of the proceedings and therefore, the contention raised by the learned Senior Counsel appearing 
for the petitioner cannot be accepted. 


33. Perusal of the FORM 26 Affidavit by the respondent, wherein the respondent has furnished the pending 
criminal cases in which she has been arraigned as accused, so also, in terms of the judgment of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Krishnamoorthy (supra) case, has to furnish pending cases in which the punishment is more than 
two years and therefore, I find force in the submission made by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that, 
there is no cause of action to prefer the Election Petition. In that view of the matter, the judgment referred to by the 
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner in the case of Bhim Rao Baswanth Rao Patil (supra) is not applicable to the 
case on the hand as the respondent has disclosed the pending criminal cases, in which, the punishment is more 
than two years and therefore, the contentions raised by the petitioner cannot be accepted. 


34. It is to be noted that, unless there is a specific averment and material evidence in support of the 
contention that such material of non-disclosure of pending or prior criminal cases and also as to not filing the requisite 
assets and liabilities as contended by the petitioner, to establish the “Corrupt Practice” in the Election Petition, it is the 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


duty of the petitioner or anyone who challenges the election of the Returned Candidate must required to plead 
essential material statement of facts with full particulars of any Corrupt Practice with a full statement of possible name 
of the parties who have committed such “Corrupt practice” along with a date and place of commission of such 
practice, this Court has to exercise jurisdiction under Order VII Rule |l of CPC. It is evident from reading of the 
averments made in the petition that, a clever drafting has been made to create a illusion of cause of action and same 
cannot be entertained within the purview of Order शा Rule Il of the Code of Civil Procedure. On a 
combined reading of Sections 8l, 83, 86 and 87 of the Act, it is apparent that those paragraphs of the petition 
particularly the grounds urged do not disclose any cause of action. 


35. On careful examination of the language employed under Section !23 of the Act, which discloses the 
type of a practice which shall be considered as a “Corrupt Practice” where the same has been done by a 
candidate or his agent or any other person with the consent of the candidate or his agent. 


36. I am also well conscious of the fact that the Election Petition can not be summarily rejected, if the 
averments made in the petition are sufficient to conduct trial in the matter. However, Hon’ble Supreme Court in the 
case of Samant N. Balkrishna vs. George Fernandis reported in (7969) 3 SCC 238 held that the omission of 
single material fact would lead to an incomplete cause of action and that too, in Election Petition, in the 
absence of material fact relating to a Corrupt practice, has to be consider seriously and such petition is not a Election 
petition. The said aspect was also reiterated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Udhav Singh vs. Madava 
Rao Scindia reported in (4977)7 SCC 577, that all the primary facts has to be reflected in the pleadings which must 
be proved by a party to establish a cause of action or his defence or material facts. The basic facts which constitute 
the ingredients of a particular corrupt practice alleged by the petitioner must be averred in the petition in order to 
succeed in the petition. 


37. Itis also pertinent to mention here that a particular fact is material or not is depend upon the nature of the 
allegation made in the petition under the circumstance of each case, on merits. Therefore, it is required for the 
petitioner in the present case to narrate the essential facts with complete cause of action has to be pleaded in 
the petition and failure to plead even a single material fact is contrary to requirement of Section 83(l)(a) of the Act. 
It is also to be considered that the allegations of “Corrupt Practice” as narrated in the Election Petition are in the 
nature of criminal charges against the respondent- Returned Candidate and therefore, there should precision and 
specific allegation and shall not be vagueness in making allegation, so that, the respondent may know the case as to 
meet and contradicts the allegations in the petition. The charge of “Corrupt practice” being quasi-criminal in 
nature and as such, the Court has to insist on strict compliance with the provisions of law. Therefore, it is equally 
essential that the particulars of a charge of allegations must clearly and precisely stated in the petition. The burden, is 
on the petitioner who challenges the election, to narrate material facts and same shall be specific with providing 
details of such allegations. It is also to be noted that the provision under Section 83()(a) of the Act, requires that, 
while challenging the Election of the returned candidate, the Election petitioner should take extra care, leave no room 
for doubt, while making such allegation of “Corrupt Practice” indulged in by the successful candidate in the Election, 
if any [See (204)l0 SCC 547]. It is also pertinent to mention here that the respondent herein had succeeded in the 
election by a margin of more than one lakh votes, has got the support of majority of the voters who cast their 
vote in her favour. The success gained by the respondent in a Lok Sabha Election cannot be allowed to be called 
in question by a voter by making frivolous or baseless allegations and thereby, no room for unnecessarily drag the 
respondent to the Court proceedings. 


38. The scope of Order VII Rule I! of the Code of Civil Procedure is to avoid roving enquiry and 
therefore, it is duty of the Court 0 scrutinize the pleadings in Election Petition relating to “Corrupt 
Practice” in a strict manner. It is settled principle by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforementioned cases that 
the Election Petition must contain a concise statement of essential material facts in which the relief sought for by 
the petitioner and failure to state even a single material fact would entail the dismissal of the Election Petition. 


39. At this juncture, it is relevant to cite the judgment of Honb’le Supreme Court in the case of Ram 
Sevak Yadav vs. Hussain Kamil Kidwai and Others reported in (7964) 6 SCR 238, wherein, it is held that the relief 
not founded in the pleadings should not be granted to the petitioner. It is also observed by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court that, no party should be permitted to travel beyond the pleadings and the parties are bound to disclose all 
material facts in support of their case in the petition. On the other hand, it is to be held that pleadings, in the 
petition must ensure that each of the parties to the proceedings are aware about the issues that are likely to be 
raised as well as there must be an opportunity of placing the relevant evidence before the Court for its 
consideration. If the pleadings are short of material proposition of fact, then it is not permissible for the Court to 
frame an issue not arising out of the pleadings urged by the parties as no evidence can be let in by the parties 
based on the pleadings, so also, the absence of material facts in the petition on a particular issue. Applying the 
principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Kanimozhi Karunanidi (supra), wherein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court has laid down the guidelines, after discussing the entire gamet of law relating to the application of 
Order VII Rule l! of the Code of Civil Procedure in relation to Election Petition and following the dictum of the 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


Hon’ble Apex Court, I am of the view that the judgments referred to by the learned Senior Counsel appearing 
for the petitioner are not applicable to the case on hand since the averments made in the Election Petition, have to 
be looked into based on allegations made thereunder coupled with the circumstances and the essential facts narrated 
to prove such allegations in a manner known to law. _ It is also to be noted that the cases referred to by the 
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner are considered in the light of the factual aspects and the 
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, referred to above, the material enclosed along with the Election 
Petition has to establish the Corrupt practices alleged against the respondent-Returned Candidate and further the 
cases referred to by the leaned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner were referred to in the case of 
Kanimozhi Karunanidi (supra). The Hon’ble Supreme Court has arrived at a conclusion that the unsuccessful 
candidate in the election must made out a case for trial and the entire gamet of law was discussed in the said 
judgment by Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of A. Manju (supra) and applying those principles to the facts 
narrated in the present petition and further taking into consideration the entire factual aspects on record as averred in 
the petition as well as the averments made thereunder, I am of the view that, same do not constitute cause of action to 
conduct a trial in the case as the petition is devoid of cause of action. Therefore, the judgments referred to by the 
learned counsel appearing for the respondent are applicable to case on hand as the pleadings in the Election Petition is 
devoid of cause of action in terms of law declared by Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Karim Uddin Barbhuiya 
(supra) and as such, the points for determination referred to at paragraph 22 favours the respondent as the 
petitioner fails to fulfill the mandatory requirement under law. 


40. I have also noticed the averments in IA No.2 of 2024, for non compliance of Section 8(3) of the 
Act. In the amended petition filed on 28.08.2024, paragraph 3 in the verifying affidavit at page 28, notarized on 
28.08.2024, extracted as follows: 


“3. I state that, the documents produced at Annexure-P is original. I state that, documents produced at 
Annexure-B- 2, E, and N are certified copies. I state that, Annexure-A, B-l, C, F, MI to M7 are 
true prints.” 


4l. In the original Election Petition filed on 9.07.2024 at page 27, verifying affidavit notarized on 
9.07.2024, wherein paragraph ‘C’ extracted as under: 


“C. I state that, the documents produced at Annexure-P is original. I state that, documents produced at 
Annexure-B- 2, E, and N are certified copies. I state that, Annexure-A, B-l, L-2 to M-7 are true 
prints.” 


42. On comparison of these two affidavits, I find force in the submission made by the learned counsel 
appearing for the respondent that there is discrepancy in the verifying affidavits filed by the petitioner. The declaration 
of law made by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of C.P. John (supra), at paragraph 6 reads as 
under: 


“ [6, As regards the other deformity in the Election Petition, the learned Senior Counsel 
contended that the First Respondent in his written statement to the Election Petition pointed out the 
serious defects in the Election Petition, but yet the Appellant did not take any steps to correct the 
errors. The learned Senior Counsel further contended that when the First Respondent filed IA. 
No.3 of 20I] raising a preliminary objection as to lack of cause of action in the said I.A., the 
Appellant filed a counter affidavit maintaining his stand that his Election Petition fully complied with 
the statutory requirement of the Act and, therefore, nothing more was required to be done. The 
learned Senior Counsel, therefore, contended that since sufficient opportunities were made available 
to the Appellant and the same having not been availed by him, the High Court cannot be expected to 
show any extraordinary indulgence to the Appellant for filing any further affidavit to fill up the serious 
lacunae in his pleadings. The learned Senior Counsel, therefore, contended that none of the decisions 
would support the said stand of the Appellant and, therefore, the impugned judgment does not call for 
any interference. It was also contended on behalf of the First Respondent that such defects which have 
been noted by the High Court while allowing I-A. No.3 of 20l] and dismissing the Election Petition 
were not merely cosmetic in nature in order to extend any further opportunity to the Appellant.” 


43. Following the declaration of law made by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the above case, I find force 
in the submission made by the learned counsel appearing for the respondent that, there is discrepancy in filing the 
affidavit and also ante-dating of the affidavit by the notary is forthcoming. Therefore, I am of the view that, non- 
compliance of Section 83 of the Act by the petitioner and the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court referred to 
above is, squarely, applicable to accept the applications. Hence, IA No.2 of 2024 is liable to be allowed on the sole 
ground that, the petitioner herein has miserably failed to remove the defects even after identified by the respondent 
herein and brought to the notice of the petitioner. 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3] 


44. I have also keenly noticed the callousness on the part of the petitioner in filing the Election 
Petition and perusal of prayer column in the Election Petition is self-explanations, wherein, there is no provision of 
Section l00(b), l00 (9)0) and Section 00 (d)(iv) under the Act as contained in the prayer column. Though the 
correct provision is not mentioned in the prayer column, and same be cured by way of amendment, however, 
the petitioner has not made efforts to notice the same and correct the provision, which has been incorporated by way 
of amendment knowing fully well that, there is no such provision under the Act. 


45. On overall reading of the Election Petition, this Court is of the opinion that the petition lacks material 
fact constituting the cause of action as required under the provisions of the Act and does not fulfill the mandatory 
requirement of law. That apart, the Election Petition does not contain a concise statement of material fact, inter-alia 
and also does not disclose a triable issue or cause of action. The contentions and allegations of the petitioner is 
based on assumption and imagination and same cannot be a basis for challenging the Election of the respondent. 
In the light of the aforesaid judgments rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, and the analysis made in this 
order, I am of the view that, there is no escape from the conclusion that the Election Petition can be 
summarily rejected as the Election Petition do not conform to Section 83 of the Act. In the result, I pass the 
following: 


ORDER 


Applications in IA No.2 of 2024 and IA.3 of 2024 filed by the respondent-Returned Candidate 
seeking rejection of the petition are hereby allowed. Consequently, Election Petition is rejected. 


No order as to costs. 
Pending applications, if any, stands disposed of. 


Sd/- 
JUDGE 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054. gavastava 


