रजिस्ट्री te डी० Uer—( TH) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Ooh. -ST. Wet.-37.-5052026-272607 
CG-DL-E-5052026-272607 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता — @rsl 
PART II — Section I 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


संग ॥7 नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, मई 5, 2026/बैशाख 25, 948 (शक) 
No. 7] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MAY 45, 2026/VAISAKHA 25, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the \5th May, 2026/Vaisakha 25, |948 (Saka) 


The Following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
6th April, 2026 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI AND DAMAN AND DIU 
REGISTRATION OF SOCIETIES REGULATION, 2026 
NO. 4 OF 2026 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of India. 


A Regulation to consolidate the laws relating to the registration and regulation of 
societies in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and 
Diu, for promoting art, fine arts, charity, craft, culture, education, literature, 
philosophy, political education, religion, sports, science and for any public or 
charitable purpose, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


I. (/) This Regulation may be called the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
and Diu Registration of Societies Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) It shall come into force on such date, as the Administrator, may, by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for 
different provisions of this Regulation. 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(5) “bye-laws” means the bye-laws of a society; 


(c) “defunct society” means a society which is not carrying on any 
business or operation, or has not filed its annual or other returns with the 
Registrar continuously for such period, as may be notified; 


(d) “district” means a revenue district notified by the Government under 
the Registration Act, 908; 


(e) “District Registrar” means an officer appointed under sub-section (3) 
of section 3; 


(f) “document” means and includes the register of members, books of 
account, returns, annual returns, other statutory registers, summons, notice, 
requisition, order or other legal processes, whether issued or kept in pursuance 
of this Regulation or any other Regulation or any other law for the time being 
in force in the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(g) “due date” means the date on which the term of a Governing Body 
of a society expires and by which the elections of the successor body shall be 
completed; 


(A) “financial year” means the period commencing from the Ist day of 
the month of April of a year and ending with the 3lst day of the month of 
March of the following year; 


(i) “General Body” means the body of all members of a society as 
specified in section 5; 


(j) “Governing Body” means the body of members elected by the 
General Body as specified in sub-section (/) of section 7; 


(k) “Government” means the Union territory Administration of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, headed by the Administrator appointed 
under article 239 of the Constitution, by the President of India; 


(J) “major” means a person who has completed the age of eighteen years; 


(m) “member” means a person who fulfils the eligibility criteria for 
becoming a member of a society as specified in section l0 and has been 
admitted as a member of the society in accordance with its bye-laws; 


(n) “Memorandum” means the memorandum of association of a society 
in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation; 


(०) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(p) “office-bearer” means and includes the President, Vice-President, 
Secretary, Joint Secretary, Manager, Treasurer or any other member of the 
Governing Body empowered under the bye-laws to give directions in regard 
to the conduct of business of the society; 


(q) “Official Gazette” means the Official Gazette of the Union territory 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(r) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Regulation; 


6 of 908. 


Sec. |] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(s) “public notice” means a notice published in at least two newspapers 
largely circulating in the area, of which one shall be in vernacular, and copy 
of which is also displayed on the notice board of the office of the District 
Registrar; 


(0) “Registrar” means the Registrar of Societies appointed under 
sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(u) “Registrar General” means the Registrar General of Societies 
appointed by the Government under sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(v) “rules” means the rules made under this Regulation; 


(w) “society” means a society duly registered under the provisions of 
section 8; 


(x) “special resolution” means a resolution passed in a meeting of the 
General Body, in which at least forty per cent. of the members entitled to vote 
are present and the resolution is approved by at least three-fifths of the 
members so present and voting; and 


(0) “State-aided society” means a society, which is in receipt of any 
recurring grant or financial aid from the Government, or a local body, or any 
of its entities, to manage its facilities or institutions established in accordance 
with the objectives set out in its Memorandum or its bye-laws and shall include 
a society where any one or more of its institutions are receiving such aid. 


CHAPTER II 
OFFICERS OF SOCIETY 


3. (4) The Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 


appoint an officer not below the rank of Secretary, as the Registrar General of 
Societies, who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties and functions, as 
are conferred upon him by or under this Regulation. 


(2) The Government may, by order, appoint— 


(a) a Group ‘A’ officer of the Government not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary, as the Registrar of Societies; and 


(b) other officers of the Government, not below the rank of Group ‘B’ 
officer, as Additional Registrar or Joint Registrar, to assist the Registrar in the 
discharge of his functions and empower them to exercise such powers and 
perform such duties and functions, as may be assigned to them, from time to 
time. 


(3) The Government may further appoint District Registrars not below the 


rank of Group ‘B’ officer in the Government, to exercise such powers and perform 
such duties and functions, as may be assigned to them under this Regulation, in 
respect of the territorial jurisdiction of one or more districts. 


(4) The Government may also appoint certain officers not below the rank of 


Group ‘B’ officer of the Government as Deputy District Registrars or Assistant 
District Registrars as per relevant service rules or terms of employment and 
empower them to perform such duties and functions, as may be assigned to them, 
from time to time. 


(5) The officers appointed under this section shall exercise the powers and 


perform the duties and functions as may be assigned to them under the overall 
administrative control and superintendence of the Government. 


Registrar 
General, other 
officers and 
their powers. 


Registrar 
General and 
other officers to 
be public 
servants. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Aims, objects 
and composition 
of society. 


Application for 
registration of 
society and 
society not to 
be registered 
with identical 
names. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


[Part II— 


4. Every officer exercising or authorised to exercise powers under this 
Regulation or the rules made thereunder shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
and clause (c) of section 2 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 988. 


5. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Registrar 
General or any official subordinate to him or acting under his authority, in respect 
of anything done by him or purporting to have been done by him in good faith under 
this Regulation. 


CHAPTER III 
AIMS AND OBJECTS OF SOCIETY 
6. Any seven or more persons associated for— 
(a) any literary, scientific or charitable purpose; or 
(b) military orphan funds; or 


(c) the promotion of science, literature, or the fine arts for instruction, 
the diffusion of useful knowledge, the diffusion of political education; or 


(d) the foundation or maintenance of libraries or reading rooms for 
general use among the members or open to the public; or 


(e) public museums and galleries of paintings and other works of art, 
collections of natural history, mechanical and philosophical inventions, 
instruments, or designs; or 


(f) the promotion of conservation and sustainable use of natural 
resources such as, land, water, forests and wildlife; or 


(g) the formation of welfare associations of flats, tenements, 
condominiums or floor space owners, 


may, by subscribing their names to a Memorandum of Association, and filing the 
same with the Registrar General, form themselves into a society under this 
Regulation. 


CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION OF SOCIETY 
7. (J) Every application for approval of the name of a society and for its 
registration shall be filed with the District Registrar, in whose jurisdiction the 
registered office of such society is situated, along with the Memorandum and the 
bye-laws prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation and 


containing all such particulars, in such form, on payment of such fee and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that if the proposed name is identical with that by which any other 
existing society referred to in sub-section (3) of section 6l has been registered or, 
in the opinion of the Registrar, so nearly resembles such name as to be likely to 
deceive the public, the Registrar shall refuse to register the name. 


(2) No society shall be registered with a name which contravenes the 
provisions of the Emblems and Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 950. 


(3) Except with the previous approval of the Government in writing, no society 
shall be registered by a name which contains any of the following expressions, 
namely:— 


(a) “co-operative or land development”; or 


(0) “Reserve Bank”; or 


45 of 2023. 
49 of 988. 


2 of 950. 


2] of 2000. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(c) “Union” or “State” or “national” or “international” or “universal” or 
any word expressing or implying the sanction, approval or patronage of the 
Central Government or any State Government or Union territory 
Administration; or 


(d) “Municipal” or “Panchayat” or “chartered”; or 


(e) “Investigation Bureau” or any other word which suggests or is 
calculated to suggest connection with any municipality, statutory, 
investigating or intelligence agency or other local authority. 


8. (/) The District Registrar shall, after scrutiny of the application filed under 
sub-section (/) of section 7 and the documents presented before him, if is satisfied 
that the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Regulation and the 
rules made thereunder, he shall enter the particulars of the society registered in a 
register maintained by him in physical or electronic form and issue a certificate of 
registration in such form and manner,as may be prescribed. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “electronic 
form” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (7) of sub-section (/) 
of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000. 


(2) The District Registrar may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to 
register a society and shall communicate the same to the applicant. 


(3) The District Registrar shall decide an application filed under 
sub-section (/) within such period as may be prescribed in this behalf. 


(4) Every society registered under this section shall be assigned a distinct 
registration number. 


(5) Every existing society shall apply to the District Registrar for obtaining a 
new registration number within a period of one year from the date of 
commencement of this Regulation or such further period, as the Government may, 
by notification specify, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(6) Where an existing society has not applied for obtaining a new registration 
number under sub-section (5) within a period specified therein, then such existing 
society shall apply for obtaining new registration on payment of such fee, as may 
be prescribed, within a period of six months from the date of expiry of the period 
specified in the said sub-section, and if the society fails to apply for new registration 
number within such extended period, the registration of that existing society shall 
be treated as cancelled. 


(7) A certificate of registration issued by the District Registrar shall be 
conclusive proof that the society mentioned in it is duly registered, unless proved 
otherwise. 


(8) Every society registered under this Regulation shall prominently display 
its name along with registration number outside its registered office or any other 
place where it is carrying on its business or operations, and shall have a seal with its 
name engraved thereon. 


(9) Every society registered under this Regulation shall be a legal entity, by 
the name in which it has been registered, having perpetual succession and a common 
seal, with the power, subject to the provisions of this Regulation, to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and to 
institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings and to do all other things 
necessary for the furtherance of the aims of the society for which it has been 
registered. 


(709) In this section, “existing society” means a society referred to in 
sub-section (3) of section 6]. 


Registration. 


Change of name 
and address. 


Eligibility 
conditions for 
becoming 
member. 


Register of 
members. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


9. (/) Every society shall have a registered office situated at any place in the 
district in which it is registered, to which all communications and notices shall be 
addressed. 


(2) Every society shall obtain approval from the District Registrar for change 
of its name or address within thirty days of such change, and the District Registrar 
shall record such change of name or address in the certificate of registration and the 
register of societies. 


(3) Any change of the registered office of a society to a place outside the 
district in which it is registered, shall be intimated to the District Registrars of both 
the districts. 


(4) The change of name by any society shall not affect its rights and liabilities 
or any legal proceedings, by or against it. 


CHAPTER V 
MEMBERSHIP OF SOCIETY 
0. (J) A person shall be eligible to become a member of a society, if he— 
(a) is a major of age as on the date of admission; 
(6) subscribes to the aims and objects of the society; 


(c) has deposited the membership fee as specified in the bye-laws of the 
society; and 


(d) is not an insolvent or of unsound mind or have not been convicted of 
an offence involving moral turpitude, punishable with imprisonment of one 
year or more. 


(2) A partnership firm, whether registered or not, or a body corporate of 
whatever description, shall not be eligible to be a member of a society under 
sub-section (/). 


(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (2) shall prevent a partner as defined in 
section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act, 932 or, a member or shareholder of a body 
corporate, to become a member in his individual capacity. 


I. (/) Every society shall maintain a register of its members at its registered 
office and shall enter therein the particulars of admission or removal of any member 
or the cessation of any membership, within fifteen days of such admission or 
removal or the cessation of membership, as the case may be, in such form and 
manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every society shall file a copy of the register of members maintained by it 
with the District Registrar, if not filed by it at the time of registration, within sixty 
days from the date of its registration. 


(3) The society shall file an updated list of members, duly certified by the 
authorised officer of the society, separately showing the inclusions and deletions, if 
any, every year within a period of sixty days from the close of the financial year in 
the office of the Registrar, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The register of members shall be kept open at the registered office of the 
society and remain accessible to any officer of the office of District Registrar, 
Registrar, Registrar General or any member of the society, during its business hours. 


(5) Every person, who is a member of the society on the date of notification 
of elections, shall have the right to exercise his vote in person, subject to the 
condition that he is not being in arrears of membership fees or annual subscription 
for such period as may be prescribed. 


9 of 932. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(6) Every member shall, after giving reasonable notice, have the right to 
inspect the books of account and books containing the minutes of proceedings of 
meetings, on any working day during business hours. 


2. A member, admitted to a society, shall cease to be so in the following 
events, namely:— 


(a) upon submission and acceptance of his resignation; or 


(8) if he ceases to fulfil the eligibility condition for being admitted as a 
member as mentioned in section 0; or 


(c) upon his failure to pay membership fee or annual subscription fee 
continuously for such period as may be prescribed; or 


(d) upon the death of a member: 


Provided that in case of a housing society or a resident welfare 
association registered as a society for the operation, management and 
maintenance of facilities for the residents or civic amenities of any defined 
area, the nominee or the legal heir of such member shall be enrolled as a 
member subject to fulfilment of qualifications and eligibility conditions as laid 
down in the bye-laws and the provisions of this Regulation. 


CHAPTER VI 
MEMORANDUM AND BYE-LAWS OF SOCIETY 
3. (J) The Memorandum shall state— 
(a) the name of the society; 
(5) the aims and objects of the society; 


(c) the names, addresses and occupations of the members of the first 
Governing Body to whom the management of its affairs is entrusted under the 
bye-laws; and 


(d) the address of the registered office of the society. 


(2) The Memorandum and bye-laws, certified to be a true copy by not less 
than three members, shall be filed with the Registrar at the time of registration of 
the society. 


4. (J) A society may, by a special resolution of the Governing Body, amend 
the provisions of its Memorandum with respect to— 


(a) change in name of society; or 


(6) change in the aims and objects of the society, as may be permissible 
under this Regulation. 


(2) A society may amend its bye-laws by a special resolution. 


(3) Any special resolution passed under sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) shall 
be filed with the District Registrar within thirty days from the date of approval 
thereof and the District Registrar may, ifhe is satisfied that the same is in accordance 
with the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder, register the 
amendments so made and any such change shall have no effect until it has been so 
registered. 


(4) If the District Registrar refuses to register the amendments made in the 
Memorandum or the bye-laws of a society under sub-section (3), he shall 
communicate the reasons therefor in writing within a period of sixty days of filing 
of the special resolution by the society, and the special resolution so passed by the 
society shall have no effect: 


Cessation of 
membership. 


Memorandum. 


Amendment in 
Memorandum 
and bye-laws. 


General Body. 


Meetings of 


General Body. 


Governing 
Body, its 


office-bearers, 


powers and 
functions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided that if the District Registrar fails to communicate the reasons within 
sixty days, the special resolution shall be deemed to have been registered by him. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation or the rules made 
thereunder, if the Registrar considers that an amendment of the Memorandum or 
bye-laws is necessary or desirable to bring the same in conformity with the 
provisions of this Regulation or the rules made thereunder, he may, by an order in 
writing, direct the society to make such amendment within such time, as may be 
specified, in such order and the same shall be final and binding on the society and 
its members. 


CHAPTER VII 
GENERAL BODY AND GOVERNING BODY 


5. (J) The total number of persons admitted as members of a society in 
accordance with the provisions of this Regulation shall constitute its General Body. 


(2) Every society shall specify in its bye-laws the composition of its General 
Body, its powers, functions and duties, the periodicity of and the quorum for the 
meetings, the manner of recording its proceedings and all other matters relating to 
the affairs of the General Body. 


(3) The quorum for the meeting of the General Body shall not be less than 
forty per cent. of the total members entitled to vote and present in person, subject to 
a minimum of four members. 


(4) Every member shall have one vote and shall cast his vote in person or 
digitally. 


6. (7) An annual general meeting of the General Body, may be held as and 
when required: 


Provided that at least one meeting of the General Body shall be held in every 
financial year in which the annual accounts of the society, duly audited, shall be 
placed before the members for approval. 


(2) A clear notice of fourteen days of every meeting shall be given to the 
members of the General Body, before the date appointed for the meeting and a copy 
of such notice along with the business to be transacted during the general meeting 
shall also be endorsed to the Registrar. 


7. (J) The members of the General Body shall elect the Governing Body (by 
whatever name called), consisting of not less than three and not exceeding 
twenty-one members. 


(2) The office-bearers of the Governing Body shall comprise of the President, 
Secretary and Treasurer as a minimum, and other office-bearers shall be as specified 
in the bye-laws. 


(3) The society shall file the list of the elected office-bearers with the District 
Registrar within a period of thirty days of holding of the elections for the Governing 
Body, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The tenure of the Governing Body shall not exceed three years and the 
matters pertaining to re-election of any office-bearer shall be regulated in 
accordance with the bye-laws. 


(5) Every society shall maintain a register showing the names, addresses and 
occupation of the persons appointed or elected as office-bearers and shall file with 
the District Registrar,— 


(a) a copy of such register within a period of thirty days from the date of 
appointment or election of the office-bearers; 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(6) a notice of every change in the office-bearer within a period of thirty 
days from the date of such change; and 


(c) the details of the office-bearers along with the annual return. 


(6) The constitution of the Governing Body, appointed or elected for the first 
time or thereafter, shall be valid only upon approval thereof by the District Registrar 
and its tenure shall commence from the date of its approval. 


(7) The District Registrar shall communicate the approval for the constitution 
of Governing Body, appointed or elected for the first time or thereafter, within a 
period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such application for approval, failing 
which, it shall be deemed to be approved. 


8. (/) The meetings of the Governing Body may be held as and when 
required: 


Provided that the Governing Body shall meet once in every quarter and hold 
at least four meetings in a financial year. 


(2) A clear notice of three days of every meeting of the Governing Body shall 
be given by the Secretary of the Governing Body to the office-bearers before the 
date appointed for the meeting: 


Provided that the Governing Body may meet at shorter notice, wherever so 
required, with the consent of at least fifty per cent. of its members. 


9. (/) The society shall maintain record of the minutes of proceedings of 
every meeting of the General Body and Governing Body in the proceedings book 
separately maintained for this purpose and such minutes shall be signed by the 
President and Secretary of the society. 


(2) In case the minutes of the meeting are not signed by the President for any 
reasons, whatsoever, the Governing Body may authorise any of the office-bearer to 
sign such minutes. 


(3) The minutes of every meeting of the Governing Body or the General Body, 
as the case may be, shall be placed for confirmation in its succeeding meeting of 
such body. 


(4) Any resolution passed by the Governing Body or the General Body, as the 
case may be, during any of its meetings, which is not consistent with the provisions 
of this Regulation, or the rules made thereunder, or the bye-laws, shall be invalid. 


(5) No act or proceedings of a society or any of its office-bearer shall be 
deemed to be invalid merely on the ground of any vacancy or defect in the 
organisation of the society. 


20. Every society shall supply a copy of the balance-sheet or a statement of 
accounts together with the report of the auditor to every member of the General 
Body along with the notice of the annual general meeting and the same shall also be 
uploaded on the website of the society. 


CHAPTER VIII 
PROPERTY AND FUNDS OF SOCIETIES 
2. Every society registered under this Regulation may acquire movable or 


immovable property, on free-hold or on lease basis, from and out of its funds, or 
donations, grants or loans, in accordance with its bye-laws. 


22. All properties, movable and immovable, belonging to a society, whether 
acquired before or after its registration, shall vest in the society, and any such 
property may be referred to as the property of such society in any legal proceeding: 


Meetings of 
Governing 
Body. 


Record of 
proceedings. 


Supply of 
balance-sheet or 
statement of 
accounts. 


Acquisition of 
movable and 
immovable 
property. 
Property how 
vested. 


Restrictions on 
sale or transfer 
of immovable 
property. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided that in case a housing society or a resident welfare association 
registered as a society for the operation, management and maintenance of facilities 
for the residents or civic amenities of any defined area, the property may vest in the 
members or their successor-in-interest who have contributed for acquisition of such 


property: 


Provided further that where a society accepts a gift or donation of money or 
property of any other kind from any person or institution for a specific purpose, it 
shall use such money or property gifted or donated or any part thereof only for the 
purpose for which it has been so gifted or donated and for no other purpose. 


23. (/) Every society registered under this Regulation shall be competent to 
sell, transfer or alienate any of its immovable properties subject to the following, 
namely:— 


(a) in case the immovable property is acquired from the Government, or 
any of its instrumentalities or a municipal body or gram panchayat or any other 
authority, with the prior written permission of the Government; 


(5) in case the immovable property is acquired by means of a conditional 
gift or conditional donation from any source, in accordance with such 
conditions and subject to the prior permission of donor or his authorised 
representative and in case the donor is not alive and has left no such authorised 
representative, with the prior permission of the District Registrar; 


(c) in case the immovable property is acquired by the society from and 
out of its own resources or funds or borrowings, with the prior permission of 
the General Body, by a special resolution. 


(2) The Governing Body shall determine the reserve price of any immovable 
property referred to in sub-section (/), which shall not be less than the applicable 
Collector rates, before its disposal, so as to ensure that it is not sold or transferred at 
an undervalued consideration. 


(3) The expression “Collector rates,” referred to in sub-section (2), commonly 
known as circle rate or ready reckoner rates, means the minimum price value set by 
the Government to determine the stamp duty and registration charges in specified 
areas, based on factors such as location, market trends and infrastructure. 


(4) The proceeds from the transfer or sale of any immovable property of the 
society, wherever conducted in accordance with the provisions contained in this 
section, shall be immediately deposited in the account of the society, but not later 
than three working days from the date of receipt of transfer or sale proceeds, as the 
case may be. 


(5) Where any office-bearer of the Governing Body indulge in violation of the 
provisions contained in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) or sub-section (4), the 
District Registrar shall be competent to take any or all of the following actions, 
namely:— 


(a) where the amount of consideration is not deposited in the account of 
the society within three working days, direct such office-bearer to pay interest 
out of his own funds at the rate of twenty-four per cent. for the period it 
remained in his possession, but such period shall in no case be more than thirty 
days; 


(b) where the immovable property has been sold or transferred at an 
undervalued price, recover the difference assessed on the basis of Collector 
rates from the erring office-bearer and deposit the same in the account of the 
society; 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 


(c) where the immovable property has been disposed of without the 
permission as required under sub-section (/), or without complying with the 
conditions applicable, recover the amount along with any additional amount 
as assessed on the basis of Collector rates, from the concerned office-bearer 
and deposit the same with the allotting authority. 


(6) Where the recovery of any amount is due from any erring office-bearer 
under sub-section (5) in the course of enforcement, and such erring office-bearer 
fails to deposit the said amount within the period specified in the said sub-section, 
the District Registrar shall be competent to recover such amount as arrears of land 
revenue. 


(7) Nothing in this section shall absolve the office-bearer from criminal action. 


24. Every society, to such extent and under such conditions, as may be Investment of 
permitted under its bye-laws, from time to time, invest or deposit any portion of its 08: 
funds not immediately required— 


(a) in immovable properties; or 


(5) in securities of the Government or in National Savings Certificates 
or other securities of the Government of India; or 


(c) in the post office savings bank account; or 
(d) in a special account opened by the society for the purpose in— 


(7) a Scheduled Bank as authorised or notified by the Reserve Bank 
of India; or 


(ii) a co-operative bank situated in the Union territory; or 
(ii) such other mode of investment, as may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER IX 
ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND FILING OF DOCUMENTS 
25. (/) Every society shall keep proper books of account such as cash book, Maintenance of 
ledger, and the like as required by the Income-tax laws or the books as per the 000०8 हु 
standards laid down by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, at its head asia 


office or such other places as may be determined by the Registrar General, with 
respect to— 


(a) all sums of money received and expended by the society; and 
(0) the assets and liabilities of the society. 


(2) The books of account, returns and registers shall be verified and signed by 
at least two office-bearers, as may be authorised by the Governing Body. 


(3) The books of account shall be open to inspection during the business hours 
by the Registrar General or Registrar or District Registrar, or any officer authorised 
by him. 


26. (/) Every society shall get its annual accounts audited from an auditor who Audit. 
is amember of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, constituted under the 
38 of 949. Chartered Accountants Act, |949 or the auditor of the Union territory, Co-operative 
Department. 


(2) The auditor referred to in sub-section (/) shall not be a member of the 
Governing Body or family member of any of the office-bearer. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


sonia retums 27. (/) Every society shall file the following returns, in such form and manner 
nets as may be prescribed, with the District Registrar within thirty days of holding the 
annual general meeting, namely:— 


(a) a list of the members duly certified by the President and the 
Secretary, as on the 3lst March of the year, separately showing the deletions 
and additions during the previous year; 


(6) a list of the office-bearers along with their names, addresses and 
occupations separately showing the deletions and additions, if any; 


(c) an annual report on the working of the society by the Governing Body 
duly certified by the President and the Secretary; 


(d) a copy each of the balance-sheet, receipt, expenditure statement and 
the report of the auditor duly certified by him; and 


(e) a copy of the special resolution, as and when passed. 


(2) Any society which is required to submit any statement or returns specified 
in sub-section (/) within the time specified therein, fails to do so, the District 
Registrar or Registrar may depute an officer to prepare the necessary statement or 
return: 


Provided that in such cases, it shall be competent for the Registrar to 
determine, with reference to the time involved in the work and the emoluments of 
the officer deputed to do it, the charges which the society concerned should pay to 
the Registrar General or Registrar and to direct its recovery from the society. 


CHAPTER X 
AMALGAMATION AND DIVISION 


Sees 28. (/) Any two or more societies, after passing special resolutions for 


sadieties. amalgamating with each other, shall move an application along with copy of the 
said resolutions, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, for obtaining 
approval of the Registrar and after getting the approval, shall amalgamate together 
as one society. 


(2) Any society, after passing special resolution for division of a society, shall 
move an application, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, along with 
copy of such resolution, for obtaining approval of the Registrar and after getting the 
approval, shall stand divided. 


(3) The special resolution for division referred to in sub-section (2) shall 
contain proposals for the division of the assets and liabilities of the society among 
the newly divided societies, relationship of the parent society with the divided 
societies, if any, and may specify the areas of operation of and the members who 
may constitute each of the new societies: 


Provided that before division, the society shall settle all the claims and 
liabilities or divide the assets and liabilities amongst the societies on pro rata basis. 


(4) No amalgamation or division of a society under sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2), as the case may be, shall have effect until and unless the new society 
is or societies are duly registered. 


(5) Upon the registration of the new amalgamated society or the divided 
societies, as the case may be, the assets and liabilities of the original registered 
society or societies shall, subject to the provisions of this section, be transferred to 
and become the assets and liabilities of the new society or societies in the manner 
specified in the special resolution referred to in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2), 
as the case may be. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


CHAPTER XI 
INQUIRY AND SUPERSESSION OF GOVERNING BODY 


29. (J) The Registrar General or Registrar or District Registrar, may, by 
written order, require any society to furnish in writing, such information or 
document or explanation as specified in that order, within such time, not being less 
than two weeks from the date of receipt of such order. 


(2) On receipt of the order, it shall be the duty of the society to furnish such 
information or documents or explanation, as may be specified in that order. 


30. (J) Where the Registrar General or Registrar or District Registrar is 
satisfied that— 


(a) the records, registers or the books of account of a society are likely 
to be tampered with or destroyed, and the funds and the property are likely to 
be misappropriated or misapplied; or 


(6) the Governing Body is reconstituted at a general meeting and the 
outgoing members of the Governing Body refused to hand-over charge of the 
records and property of the society to those entitled to receive such charge; or 


(c) the office-bearers, where the elections of the Governing Body have 
not been held by the due date, are likely to misuse such documents, funds or 
records, or are reluctant to hand over the records to an ad hoc committee or 
the administrator appointed for managing the affairs of the society as an 
interim measure under the provisions of section 33, 


he may issue an order directing a person duly authorised by him in writing to seize 
and take possession of such document, funds, records and property, whereupon the 
office-bearer responsible for custody of such documents, record, funds and property 
shall give delivery thereof to the person so authorised. 


(2) In order to secure compliance of the order under sub-section (/), the 
District Registrar may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause to be 
used such minimum force, including police force, as may be considered necessary. 


3. (7) Where on the information received or gathered under section 29, or on 
the application of a majority of the office-bearers of a society, or on the application 
of not less than one-third of the members of the General Body, as the case may be, 
or if so moved by the Government or the District Collector, the Registrar General 
or Registrar or District Registrar is of the opinion that there is apprehension that— 


(a) the affairs of such society are being so conducted as to defeat the 
aims and objects of the society; or 


(8) its Governing Body is guilty of mismanaging its affairs or of any 
breach of fiduciary or other like obligations or to defraud its creditors, 


the Registrar General or Registrar or District Registrar, as the case may be, may, in 
writing, order an inquiry to be conducted either himself or by any person authorised 
by him in that behalf, into the affairs of that society. 


(2) An application or reference made by the Government or District Collector 
to the Registrar General or Registrar or District Registrar under sub-section (/) shall 
be supported by such evidence, as he may require for the purpose of showing that 
the applicant has good reason for applying for an inquiry. 


(3) The Registrar General or Registrar or District Registrar may, before the 
inquiry is ordered by him, require the applicants to furnish such security as he thinks 
fit as the cost of the proposed inquiry. 


Power to call for 
information or 
explanation. 


Powers to seize 
records, etc. 


Power to 
inquire. 


l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(4) All expenses incidental or preliminary to the inquiry shall, where such 
inquiry is held,— 


(a) on an application, be defrayed by the applicants thereof or out of the 
assets of the society or by the members of the society, in such proportion as 
the District Registrar may, by order in writing direct; and 


(0) on a reference from the District Collector or the Government or on 
own motion of the District Registrar, be defrayed out of the assets of the 
society and shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. 


(5) A person holding an inquiry shall have, at all reasonable times, free access 
to all the documents and shall have power to call upon any office-bearer or member 
to produce any of the document, as he may direct. 


(6) It shall be the duty of all office-bearers or members, who were or are 
holding office in the society, to furnish the person holding the inquiry with all the 
information or document in their possession. 


(7) A person holding an inquiry may— 


(a) summon and examine any person on oath who, he has reason to 
believe, has knowledge of any affairs of the society; and 


(6) summon any person to produce any books of account or documents 
belonging to him or in his custody, if the person holding the inquiry has reason 
to believe that such books of account or documents contain any entries relating 
to transactions of the society. 


(8) A person holding an inquiry may, if in his opinion it is necessary for the 
purpose of inquiry, seize any or all the documents: 


Provided that any person from whose custody such documents are seized shall 
be entitled to a receipt thereof and make copies thereof. 


(9) If the inquiry is held under this section by— 


(a) the District Registrar, he shall forward the report to the Registrar 
along with his recommendations; or 


(5) a person other than the District Registrar, he shall send the report to 
the District Registrar and the District Registrar shall make a report to the 
Registrar along with his recommendations; or 


(c) the Registrar himself, he shall forward the report to the Registrar 
General along with his recommendations. 


(/9) The inquiry report shall be communicated to the society and the 
applicants, if any. 


Action on 32. The Registrar shall consider the inquiry report along with the 
Inquiry report. recommendations of the District Registrar, if any, and take any of the following 
steps, namely:— 


(a) where no irregularities of procedural or material nature are found to 
have been committed by the Governing Body, he shall order closure of the 
inquiry along with information thereof to the society and applicants, if any; or 


(6) where the irregularities or violations committed by the society are 
found to be of procedural nature, which are rectifiable, he shall direct the 
society to take recourse to such corrective measures within such time, as he 
may direct and the society shall submit a compliance report thereof to the 
Registrar; or 


(c) where the irregularities or violations committed by the society are 
found to be of a serious or material nature, he shall pass any other appropriate 
order to meet the ends of justice. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


33. (/) Where, based on inspection, inquiry or audit under this Regulation, the 
District Registrar or Registrar submits a report or recommendation indicating that 
the Governing Body or a society is not functioning in accordance with the provisions 
of this Regulation or is acting against the interest of its members, the Registrar shall 
forward such report or recommendation to the Registrar General. 


(2) If upon receipt of report, the Registrar General is of the opinion that a 
prima facie case is made out for supersession of the Governing Body, he shall issue 
a show cause notice indicating the proposed action, consider the response of the 
society, and if so requested, provide an opportunity of hearing, before passing 
appropriate order. 


(3) The Registrar General, after considering the reply of the society, shall pass 
an order and may appoint an officer as administrator to manage the affairs of the 
society with such directions as deemed appropriate and the orders passed by the 
Registrar General in this behalf shall be final. 


(4) The officer referred to in sub-section (3) shall be a Group ‘B’ officer or of 
equivalent rank in the service of the Government or any statutory authority, or such 
person who may have retired from a Group ‘B’ or equivalent position from the 
Government or the Central Government or a statutory authority. 


(5) Where a retired person is appointed as the administrator, the Registrar 
General may also fix the honorarium or remuneration to be paid to the administrator 
during the course of his appointment at such rates as may be prescribed and direct 
such expenditure to be defrayed out of the funds of the society. 


(6) The administrator appointed under sub-section (3) may hold office for a 
period which shall not exceed one year in the first instance, but whose term may be 
extended for such further period, as considered necessary, subject to the same not 
exceeding three years in total. 


(7) On the appointment of the administrator under sub-section (3), the 
Governing Body shall cease to exercise any powers and perform and discharge any 
functions or duties conferred or imposed on it under this Regulation or the bye-laws. 


(8) The administrator so appointed shall exercise all the powers of the 
Governing Body and perform all such functions or duties during the course of his 
appointment as provided in the bye-laws, subject to any directions from the 
Registrar General. 


(9) The administrator shall, before the expiry of his term, take necessary action 
to hold the election of the Governing Body, if so required. 


(0) If the administrator is, for reasons beyond his control, not able to hold the 
election of the Governing Body or fails to convene a meeting of the General Body, 
as the case may be, or in spite of such meeting having been convened, the General 
Body, fails to elect the Governing Body, the administrator shall forthwith send a 
report to the Registrar General who may pass such orders, as may be considered 
expedient, either extending the term of appointment of the administrator for a further 
period as may be specified in the order or, if satisfied that public interest so 
necessitates, for the dissolution of the society. 


(//) The Registrar General may, if he thinks appropriate, appoint a committee 
to advise and assist the administrator so appointed for exercise of the powers and 
discharge of the duties and functions conferred or imposed on him under this 
Regulation. 


(/2) The members of the committee shall have such qualifications, as may be 
prescribed, and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Registrar General. 


(/3) Where an order of dissolution is passed under sub-section (/0) by the 
Registrar General, further action shall be taken in accordance with the relevant 
provisions of this Regulation. 


Supersession of 
Governing Body 
and 
appointment of 
administrator. 


Removal of 
defunct society 
and cancellation 
of their 
registration. 


Cancellation of 
registration of 
society with no 
assets and 
liabilities. 


l6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER XII 
SUSPENSION, CANCELLATION AND DISSOLUTION 


34. (J) Where the District Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that a 
society is defunct and is not carrying on business or operations, he shall issue a show 
cause notice to such society at its registered office to show cause as to whether it is 
carrying on its business or operations and directing it to file such documents or 
returns, within a period of ninety days from the date of issue of such notice. 


(2) Where the defunct society responds to such notice within the specified 
period and submits the requisite documents or informs along with evidence that it is 
carrying on business or operations, the District Registrar shall, after due verification 
of records, pass an appropriate order. 


(3) If the District Registrar receives a reply from the defunct society to the 
effect that it is not carrying on any business or operations, he may direct the society 
to convene a meeting of its General Body, pass a special resolution for its dissolution 
after settling all its liabilities and shall apply for dissolution of the society within a 
period of thirty days from the date of such resolution. 


(4) Where the District Registrar does not receive any reply within a period of 
ninety days referred to in sub-section (/), he shall cause a public notice to be issued 
stating that on the expiration of such period as may be specified in such notice, the 
registration of such defunct society shall be suspended. 


(5) If no response is received from the defunct society, or from its members, 
creditors or claimants, within the period specified in the public notice issued under 
sub-section (4), the District Registrar shall order suspension of registration of such 
society and after passing of such order, the society shall not carry on any business. 


(6) The District Registrar shall cause to be notified an order passed, 
suspending the registration of a society under sub-section (5), through a public 
notice for the information of general public. 


(7) The society or any of its member, creditor or claimant, aggrieved by an 
order of suspension passed under sub-section (5), may, within a period of three 
months from the date of the order of suspension, submit a representation to the 
District Registrar. 


(8) The District Registrar may, on being satisfied and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, that the society, at the time of its suspension, was carrying on 
business or operations, or otherwise, and it is just and equitable that the name of the 
society be restored to the register, revoke the suspension. 


(9) The society whose registration is restored under sub-section (8) shall be 
deemed to have continued in existence, as if its registration had not been suspended. 


(20) No claims, whatsoever, shall be valid and entertained against a society on 
the expiry of a period of three months from the date of suspension of its registration. 


(//) If no representation against the suspension order is received within a 
period of three months from the date of suspension of registration, the District 
Registrar may, unless contrary is shown, strike off the name of the society from the 
register of societies and cancel its registration. 


35. A society, which has no assets or liabilities to its account and is not 
desirous of carrying on with its business or operations, may, after passing a special 
resolution, apply for cancellation of its registration to the District Registrar and the 
District Registrar shall, after giving a public notice of not less than ninety days 
inviting objections, strike out its name from the register of societies after 
considering objections, if any. 


Sec. I] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


36. (/) The Registrar may, if he is satisfied that— 
(a) the business of any such society is conducted, fraudulently; or 
(b) the society is declared insolvent; or 


(c) the society is carrying on any unlawful activity or allowing unlawful 
activity to be carried on in the premises under its control, 


order an inquiry to be conducted by the District Registrar or any other officer 
authorised by him in accordance with the procedure contained in sections 3] to 33 
and submit a report thereof within the period specified in such order. 


Explanation.—F or the purposes of this sub-section, an activity shall be treated 
as unlawful, if such activity is an offence punishable under the provisions of any 
law for the time being in force. 


(2) On receipt of the report referred to in sub-section (/) from the District 
Registrar, the Registrar shall issue a public notice inviting objections, if any, as to 
why the registration of the society should not be cancelled. 


(3) After considering the objections filed by the society and public, and after 
giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the society, the Registrar may 
cancel the registration. 


37. When the registration of a society is cancelled, the society shall forthwith 
cease to carry on its business, except in so far as it may be required for the beneficial 
winding-up of its affairs, for which purpose it shall pass a special resolution and 
dissolve itself in the manner as provided in this Regulation: 


Provided that the liability of office-bearers shall continue and may be enforced 
as if the registration of society has not been cancelled. 


38. (/) Where the registration of a society is cancelled, the District Registrar 
shall— 


(a) direct the society to complete the process of its dissolution, that is, 
pass a special resolution, collect all its receivables and settle all its liabilities, 
provide the details of any of its assets left over after settlement of the 
liabilities, and submit a proposal for transfer of its left over assets to any other 
society in existence with identical aims and objects; 


(6) assess the credentials of a society to whom any such assets are 
proposed to be transferred by the society referred to in clause (a) and may, 
either approve such proposal, or direct the society to place such assets at the 
disposal of the District Collector; 


(c) constitute a committee of members of such society to carry out the 
process of its dissolution, where it has no Governing Body or General Body 
to carry out his directions under clauses (a) and (5); 


(d) be competent to complete the dissolution of the affairs of the society 
on his own or appoint any of his subordinates to do the needful or associate 
any two members from any other society in existence for the purpose. 


(2) If on dissolution and after settlement of all the claims and liabilities, a 
society is left with any movable or immovable assets, the District Registrar shall, in 
the first instance, make efforts to transfer all such assets to any other society in 
existence with identical aims and objects in operation against a proper receipt and 
submit a report thereof to the Registrar General, failing which, all such assets shall 
vest in the custody of the District Collector. 


(3) Where any asset is placed at the disposal of the District Collector, he may, 
either direct the transfer thereof to a society in operation with identical aims and 
objects or use such assets preferably for the same purpose or for any other public 
purpose. 


Cancellation of 
registration 
upon inquiry. 


Effect of 
cancellation of 
registration. 


Procedure on 
cancellation of 
registration. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Dissolution by 39. (/) A society may resolve to dissolve itself by passing a special resolution 


ial : : 
eae in a meeting of its General Body convened for the purpose. 


(2) On passing of the special resolution under sub-section (/), the Governing 
Body shall take all necessary steps for settlement of all claims and liabilities, as it 
may consider appropriate in accordance with its bye-laws and if there are no 
bye-laws, in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) If any dispute arises amongst the members of the society, the Governing 
Body, or the special committee, regarding the winding-up of the affairs of the 
society, it shall be referred to the District Registrar for such directions, as he may 
consider appropriate: 


Provided that the special resolution for dissolution of the society shall not be 
a matter in dispute. 


(4) If the Central Government or the Government or any of its 
instrumentalities is a member of or a contributory to or otherwise interested in any 
society, such society shall not be dissolved without the consent of the Central 
Government or the Government, as the case may be. 


(5) After all necessary steps have been completed, the Governing Body shall 
send a report to the District Registrar, mentioning about the surplus assets, if any. 


(6) The District Registrar shall thereupon cause a public notice issued at the 
expense of the society inviting objections from any person interested in the affairs 
of such society within the period specified in such notice, which shall not be less 
than three months. 


(7) If no objection is received from any claimant, creditor or member of the 
society within three months from the date of issue of such public notice, and after 
the surplus assets, if any, have been disposed of as provided in this Regulation, the 
District Registrar shall make an order confirming the dissolution and thereupon the 
society shall stand dissolved and the District Registrar shall record the order of 
dissolution in the register maintained in his office and strike off the name of the 
society from the register of societies. 


(8) If any objection is received from any claimant, or creditor, or member, or 
any other interested person, within a period mentioned in sub-section (7), the 
District Registrar shall not make an order confirming the dissolution of the society 
unless he is satisfied that the relevant claim or liability have been duly settled and 
the surplus assets, if any, have been disposed of as provided in this Regulation. 


Dissolution by 40. (/) Where the Government decides to dissolve a society under 

Reo sub-section (/0) of section 33 or where the registration of a society is cancelled and 
it is found to be fit for dissolution under section 39, the Registrar General or the 
Registrar, as the case may be, shall order dissolution of such society in accordance 
with the procedure specified under the said sections. 


(2) Upon passing an order for dissolution of a society under sub-section (/), 
the Registrar General or the Registrar or the District Registrar, as the case may be, 
shall take action for winding-up the affairs of the dissolved society in accordance 
with the provisions of this Regulation. 


Disposal of 4l. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 38, after the settlement 

ae of claims and liabilities of society, where any surplus assets are left, such assets shall 
not be paid to or distributed amongst the members of the society, but shall be taken 
over and vest in the custody of Government: 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Provided that in case of a housing society or where a resident welfare 
association is registered as a society, the operation, management and maintenance 
of facilities for the residents or civic amenities of any defined area, the 
successor-in-interest shall step in the shoes of original member, subject to fulfilment 
of qualifications as laid down in the bye-laws of the society and the provisions of 
this Regulation. 


(2) The Government shall place such assets at the disposal of the District 
Collector, who may,— 


(i) in the first instance identify any other society in operation with 
identical aims and objects and transfer such assets to such society; 


(ii) use such assets, preferably for the purpose for which such assets were 
created; or 


(iii) for any other public purpose, as deemed appropriate. 


(3) The records of accounts shall be maintained for a period of three years 
from the date of dissolution and in case any matter pertaining to any such society is 
pending before any court, such records shall be maintained till the final disposal of 
such matter by the competent court. 


CHAPTER XIII 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


42. Ifa society fails to comply with any of the requirements of this Regulation, 
or contravenes any of the provisions thereof, then such society in default shall be 
liable for penalty which may extend up to two thousand rupees, as may be 
prescribed, and in case of a continuing default or contravention, with penalty which 
may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which the default or 
contravention continues. 


43. If an office-bearer or any employee of the society, knowingly or willingly 
makes or causes to be made any false entry in, or any omission from any register, 
account, balance-sheet, or other document, required to be maintained by a society 
under this Regulation, he shall be liable for penalty of a sum which may extend to 
five thousand rupees and may be removed from such membership or position of the 
society. 


44. If any office-bearer,— 


(a) knowingly or willingly makes a false return or furnishes false 
information; or 


(6) wilfully or without any reasonable reason, disobeys any summons, 
requisition or other lawful order or direction issued under the provisions of 
this Regulation; or 


(c) with holds or fails to furnish any information lawfully required from 
him by the District Registrar, Registrar or Registrar General or a person 
authorised in this behalf under the provisions of this Regulation, 


such office-bearer shall be liable for penalty of a sum which may extend to five 
thousand rupees and in the case of a continuing default or contravention, with a 
penalty which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the 
default or contravention continues. 


45. The penalties under this Chapter shall be imposed by the Registrar or any 
officer authorised in this behalf by the Registrar General or Registrar, after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, and such sum of penalties shall be credited 
to the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Penalty for 
non-compliance 
or contravention. 


Penalty for 
falsifying any 
document. 


Penalty for 
furnishing false 
information or 
disobeying 
summons, 
requisition or 
other order or 
direction. 


Crediting of 
penalties 
imposed under 
this Regulation. 


Registrar to 
recover cost 
from officers of 
society. 


Power of District 
Registrar to 
condone delay in 
certain cases. 


Appeal against 
penalties and 
review. 


Legal 
representation 
and authority. 


Enforcement of 
judgment. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


46. Where any society fails to rectify the defects as directed by the Registrar 
and where no appeal has been made to the Registrar General under sub-section (/) 
of section 48 or where such appeal has been made and the Registrar General has not 
annulled, reversed or modified the order, the Registrar may take steps to have the 
defects rectified and may recover the cost, which were incurred for rectification of 
such defects, from the officers of the society who, in his opinion, have failed to 
rectify the defects. 


47. The District Registrar may, upon an application in writing by any society 
and on sufficient cause being shown, allow further time to such society to comply 
with any of the provisions of this Regulation on payment of such late fees, as may 
be prescribed. 


48. (/) Any person or society, aggrieved— 


(a) by an order imposing penalty under section 42 or section 43 or 
section 44; or 


(5) by any other order passed under this Regulation, 
shall have the following recourse, namely:— 


(i) the society concerned may make an appeal, against such order to the 
Registrar General within a period of sixty days from the date of the imposition 
of such penalty; and 


(ii) the Registrar General may, in deciding the appeal, by order, annul, 
reverse, modify or confirm the order appealed against. 


(2) Any society or person aggrieved by an order of the Registrar General, may 
file a second appeal before the Government within a period of sixty days from the 
date of issuance of such order. 


(3) Any society or person who fails to file the aforesaid second appeal within 
the period referred to in sub-section (2), and if the society or person has shown 
sufficient cause for not preferring such appeal within such period, that appeal may 
be entertained even after the expiry of the said period, but not later than another 
sixty days. 


(4) The decision of the Government shall be final and binding on the parties. 


(5) Every appeal referred to in this section shall be in such form and 
accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an order passed by the 
Registrar or the Registrar General may be reviewed by such prescribed authority, 
on an application filed by the aggrieved party within a period of ninety days from 
the date of issuance of such order. 


49. (/) The committee or any office-bearer of the society authorised in this 
behalf by its bye-laws, may bring or defend any action or other legal proceedings 
touching or concerning any property or any right or claim of the society and may 
sue or be sued in its name. 


(2) No suit or other legal proceedings shall abate due to any vacancy or change 
in the position of the President, the Secretary or any office-bearer authorised under 
sub-section (/). 


50. A judgment, which shall be delivered against any office-bearer of the 
society, shall not be enforced against such office-bearer or his property, either 
movable or immovable, but shall be enforced against the property of the society. 


47 of 2023. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2. 


5l. No act or proceedings of a society or any of its office-bearer shall be 
deemed to have been invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or defect in the 
organisation of the society. 


52. Any notice, order or requisition meant for a society, or for the Governing 
Body thereof, to be issued by the District Registrar, Registrar or the Registrar 
General or any other person or body, shall be served on the President or Secretary 
of the society, and the service on the President or Secretary of the society shall be 
effectual as if the same had been served on every member of the society. 


53. All documents filed by a society with the District Registrar under this 
Regulation shall be deemed to be public documents within the meaning of 
section 74 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 


54. The Government may, as soon as possible, introduce measures for the 
effective governance and efficient administration of the provisions of this 
Regulation, and upon implementation of such measures, all or part of the 
transactions, forms, payments, and other services under this Regulation, may be 
administered in electronic or online mode. 


55. The Government shall be competent to issue such directions to any society, 
as it may deem appropriate, for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this 
Regulation and the rules made thereunder. 


56. (/) The Administrator may, by notification, make rules not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Regulation, for carrying out the purposes of this 
Regulation. 


(2) Every rule made under this Regulation shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following 
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


57. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Regulation, the provisions of 
this Regulation shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for the time being in force in the Union territory of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu. 


58. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Regulation, the Administrator may, by general or special order published in the 
Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Regulation as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years 
from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


59. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter which the District Registrar, Registrar or the Registrar 
General, or any other authority empowered under this Regulation is required to 
determine. 


Acts or 
proceedings not 
to be invalidated 
by certain 
defects. 


Mode of service. 


Public 
documents. 


E-governance. 


Power of 
Government to 
issue directions. 


Power to make 
tules and laying. 


Act to override 
other laws. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Bar of 
jurisdiction of 
civil courts. 


Settlement of 
disputes, 
distribution of 
surplus, fees and 
recovery of 
dues. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


60. (/) Any dispute relating to membership, including admission, termination 
or rights of members, shall be decided by the District Registrar or Registrar or such 
authority as may be specified under the rules and the decision of the Registrar in 
this regard shall be binding, subject to appeal as provided under section 48. 


(2) The utilisation or distribution of any surplus, dividend or profit among the 
members shall be subject to the conditions and limits, as may be prescribed, 
ensuring transparency and equitable benefit-sharing. 


(3) The fees payable for registration, filing of documents, inspections, 
certifications or any other service rendered under this Regulation shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


(4) Any amount due to the Government, the District Registrar or the society 
under this Regulation, including penalties or prescribed fees, shall be recoverable as 
arrears of land revenue in such manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (/) The Societies Registration Act, |860, in its application to the Union 
territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, the Societies Registration 
(Goa, Daman and Diu First Amendment) Act, 979, as extended to the erstwhile 
Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and the Union territory of Daman and 
Diu and the Societies Registration (Goa Second Amendment) Act, 998, as 
extended to the erstwhile Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli (herein referred 
to as the repealed enactments), are hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the 
repealed enactments, or under any order, rule, regulation or bye-laws made, or any 
instructions or certificate issued, in the exercise of any power conferred by or under 
the repealed enactments, shall be deemed to have been done or taken in the exercise 
of the powers conferred by the corresponding provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) Any society registered at any place in the Union territory of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu under the Societies Registration Act, 860, the 
Societies Registration (Goa, Daman and Diu First Amendment) Act, 979, as 
extended to the erstwhile Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and the Union 
territory of Daman and Diu and the Societies Registration (Goa Second 
Amendment) Act, [998, as extended to the erstwhile Union territory of Dadra and 
Nagar Haveli, shall be deemed to have been registered under this Regulation, and 
its principal office shall be deemed to be the registered office for the purposes of 
this Regulation. 


(4)(a) The Memorandum and the bye-laws of a society referred to in 
sub-section (3), to the extent they are repugnant to or inconsistent with any of the 
provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder, shall be amended and 
brought in conformity with the provisions of this Regulation within a period of two 
years from the date of commencement of this Regulation or within such further 
period as the Government may, by notification, allow, and thereafter, to the extent 
of such repugnancy or inconsistency, be deemed to be void and shall be of no 
effect; and 


(6) any officer elected or appointed to and holding office of a society 
immediately before the commencement of this Regulation shall continue to hold 
such office until the expiry of his term of office or until such office is lawfully 
terminated. 


(5) Nothing under this Regulation shall affect any right, privilege, obligation, 
liability or punishment under the repealed enactments. 


2] of 860. 


Goa, Daman and 
Diu Act 6 of 979. 


Goa Act | of 
999. 


2! of 860. 


Goa, Daman and 
Diu Act 6 of 
979. 


Goa Act | of 
999. 


Sec. |] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(6) Any investigation or proceedings, including proceedings for dissolution, 
or the supersession of the Governing Body or appointment of an administrator or 
constitution of a committee, commenced before the coming into force of this 
Regulation, shall be continued and conducted under the corresponding provisions 
of this Regulation. 


(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-sections (2) to (4), the 
0 of 897. provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 shall apply with regard to 
the effect of repeal. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MAN, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-I0054. 


MGIPMRND—54 GI—5.05.2026 


GORAKHA Distal son 
NATH NATH YADAVA 


Date: 2026.05.5 


YADAVA 22:40:38 +05'30' 


