रजिस्ट्री सं" Ste Teie—(TA)04/0007/2003—23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


प्यारत क Isa 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-12082023-248043 
CG-DL-E-12082023-248043 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग त-- खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 26] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, अगस्त 11, 2023/ श्रावण 20, 1945 (शक) 
No. 26] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, AUGUST 11, 2023/SRAVANA 20, 1945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 11th August, 2023/Sravana 20, 1945 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
11th August, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:— 


ACT, 2023 


No. 23 oF 2023 
[11th August, 2023.] 


An Act further to amend the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) 
Act, 2023. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

33 of 2017. 2. In section 4 of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred 
to as the principal Act), after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 

'(1A) On and from the date of commencement of the Indian Institutes of 
Management (Amendment) Act, 2023, the National Institute of Industrial Engineering, 
Mumbai, shall be called the “Indian Institute of Management, Mumbai” and all the 
provisions of this Act shall apply to the said Institute.'. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
of section 4. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


Amendment 3. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 
of section 5. oe, 
(i) in clause (d),— 


(a) for the words "every person employed by every existing Institute", 
the words "every person, other than a Director employed by every existing 
Institute" shall be substituted; 


(b) after the second proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


"Provided also that the provisions of the first proviso shall also be 
applicable to the Directors of the Institutes;"; 


(ii) after clause (f), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in 
relation to the Indian Institute of Management, Mumbai, the reference to the 
following expressions in sections 4 and 5— 


(i) ‘On and from the commencement of this Act”; 
(ii) “before such commencement”’; 

(iii) ““‘before commencement of this Act”; and 
(iv) “before the commencement of this Act’’, 


shall be construed as the reference to the date on which the provisions of the 
Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 comes into force.’. 
Amendment 4. In section 10 of the principal Act,— 


of section 10. 
(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), for the words "to be appointed by the 


Board", the words "to be nominated by the Visitor" shall be substituted; 
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


"(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the Board is 
suspended or dissolved under such conditions or procedure as may be 
prescribed, the Central Government shall constitute an interim Board for a period 
of six months or till a regular Board is constituted as per the provisions of this 


Act." 
Insertion of 5. After section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
new section namely:— 
10A. 
Visitor. "10A. (1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of every Institute. 


(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of any Institute and to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in 
such manner as the Visitor may direct. 


(3) The Board may also recommend to the Visitor, an inquiry as deemed proper 
against the Institute which has not been functioning in accordance with the provisions 
and objectives of this Act. 


(4) Upon receipt of any such report referred to in sub-section (2), the Visitor 
may take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect 
of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be bound to 
comply with such directions.". 


Amendment of 6. In section 12 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following sub-section 
epcton te: shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, an outgoing Member 
shall, unless the Board otherwise directs, continue in office until another person is 
appointed or nominated as a Member in his place.". 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


7. In section 16 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), for the words "appointed by the Board, on such terms", 
the words "appointed by the Board with prior approval of the Visitor, in such manner 
and subject to such terms" shall be substituted; 


(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"(3) The Director shall be appointed out of the panel of names 
recommended by a search-cum-selection committee to be constituted by the 
Board consisting of— 


(a) the Chairperson of the Board, who shall be the Chairperson of 
the search-cum-selection committee; 


(b) one Member to be nominated by the Visitor; and 


(c) two Members chosen from amongst eminent administrators, 
industrialists, educationists, scientists, technocrats and management 
specialists. 


(3A) The procedure to be adopted for selection of the Director shall be 
such as may be prescribed."; 


(c) in sub-section (7), in the opening portion, for the words "The Board may 
remove from office the Director", the words "The Board, with prior approval of the 
Visitor, may remove from office the Director" shall be substituted; 


(d) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(10) The services of the Director may be terminated by the Visitor, in 
such manner as may be prescribed.". 


8. Section 17 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


9. In section 29 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(a) an eminent person to be nominated by the Visitor as Chairperson;"; 
(ii) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 
"(d) the Chairperson of each Institute—Member, ex officio;". 
10. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
(i) for clause (a), the following clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


"(a) the conditions and the procedure subject to which the Board may be 
suspended or dissolved under sub-section (6) of section 10; 


(aa) such other powers and duties of the Board under clause (w) of 
sub-section (2) of section 11;"; 


(ii) after clause (b), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(ba) the procedure to be adopted for selection of the Director under 
sub-section (3A) of section 16; 


(bb) the manner of termination of services of the Director under 
sub-section (10) of section 16;". 


Amendment 
of section 16. 


Omission of 
section 17. 


Amendment of 
section 29. 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY _ [Parr II]—Sec. 1] 


Amendment of 11. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (c), the following 
section 39. clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


"(d) the Board of National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai, 
functioning as such immediately before the commencement of the Indian Institutes of 
Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 shall continue to so function until a new Board 
is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but on such constitution of a new 
Board under this Act, the Members of the Board holding office before such 
constitution shall cease to hold office; 


(e) the Academic Council constituted in relation to National Institute of Industrial 
Engineering, Mumbai, before the commencement of the Indian Institutes of 
Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 shall continue to so function until anew Academic 
Council is constituted for that Institute under this Act, but on the constitution of a 
new Academic Council under this Act, the Academic Council of the National Institute 
of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai shall cease to function; 


(f) until the first regulations in relation to National Institute of Industrial 
Engineering, Mumbai are made under this Act, the rules and bye-laws of the National 
Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai as in force immediately before the 
commencement of the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Act, 2023 
shall continue to apply to the National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai 
with necessary modifications and adaptations insofar as they are not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act.". 


Amendment of 12. On and from the date of commencement of the Indian Institutes of Management 
Schedule. (Amendment) Act, 2023, in the Schedule to the principal Act, after 51. No. 20 and the entries 
relating thereto, the following 51. No. and entries shall be inserted, namely:— 


"21. Maharashtra National Institute Mumbai Indian Institute 
of Industrial of Management, 
Engineering, Mumbai, Mumbai.". 
a Society registered 
under the Societies 
Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860). 


DR. REETA VASISHTA, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


Kshitiz 
Mohan 


MGIPMRND—289GI(S3)—11-08-2023. 


