रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" एल"---(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


परत क रॉलपन 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Or. sh. -S7. Wet. -37.-0822023-2505 
CG-DL-E-0822023-2505 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग Il— खण्ड | 
PART II — Section i 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं" 4] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, दिसम्बर 8, 2023/ अग्रहायण 7, 945 (शक) 
No. 4]. NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, DECEMBER 8, 2023/AGRAHAYANA 7, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 8th December, 2023/Agrahayana 7, 945 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
8th December, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE ADVOCATES (AMENDMENT) ACT, 2023 
No. 33 oF 2023 


[8th December, 2023.] 
An Act further to amend the Advocates Act, 96. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (l) This Act may be called the Advocates (Amendment) Act, 2023. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Insertion of new 
section 45A. 


Power to 
frame and 
publish lists of 
touts. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


2. After section 45 of the Advocates Act, 96] (hereinafter referred to as the principal 


Act), the following section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“4508. (l) Every High Court, District Judge, Sessions Judge, District Magistrate, 
and every Revenue-officer, not being below the rank of a Collector of a district (each as 
regards their or his own Court and the Courts, if any, subordinate thereto) may frame 
and publish lists of persons proved to their or his satisfaction, or to the satisfaction of 
any subordinate Court as provided in sub-section (3) by evidence of general repute or 
otherwise, habitually to act as touts, and may, from time to time, alter and amend such 
lists. 


Explanation.—The passing of a resolution, declaring any person to be or not to 
be atout, by a majority of the members present at a meeting, specially convened for the 
purpose, of an association of persons entitled to practice as legal practitioners in any 
Court or revenue-office, shall be evidence of the general repute of such person for the 
purposes of this sub-section. 


(2) No person's name shall be included in any such list until he shall have had an 
opportunity of showing cause against such inclusion. 


(3) Any authority empowered under sub-section () to frame and publish a list 
of touts may send to any Court subordinate to such authority the names of any 
persons alleged or suspected to be touts, and order that Court to hold an inquiry in 
regard to such persons; and the subordinate Court shall thereupon hold an inquiry 
into the conduct of such persons and, after giving each such person an opportunity of 
showing cause as provided in sub-section (2), shall report to the authority which has 
ordered the inquiry the name of each such person who has been proved to the 
satisfaction of the subordinate Court to be a tout; and that authority may include the 
name of any such person in the list of touts framed and published by that authority: 


Provided that such authority shall hear any such person who, before his name 
has been so included, appears before it and desires to be heard. 


(4) A copy of every such list shall be kept hung up in every Court to which the 
same relates. 


(5) The Court or Judge may, by general or special order, exclude from the precincts 
of the Court any person whose name is included in any such list. 


(6) Any person who acts as a tout whilst his name is included in any such list 
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both. 


(7) For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) "Judge" means the presiding judicial officer in every Civil and Criminal 
Court, by whatever title he is designated; 


(b) "subordinate Court" means all Courts subordinate to the High Court, 
including Courts of Small Causes established under any law for the time being in 
force; 


(c) "revenue-office" includes all Courts (other than Civil Courts) trying 
suits under any law for the time being in force relating to landholders and their 
tenants or agents; 


(d) "tout" means a person— 


(i) who procures, in consideration of any remuneration moving from 
any legal practitioner, the employment of the legal practitioner in any legal 
business; or who proposes to any legal practitioner or to any person 
interested in any legal business to procure, in consideration of any 
remuneration moving from either of them, the employment of the legal 
practitioner in such business; or 


25 of 96l. 


Sec. L] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(ii) who for the purposes of such procurement frequents the 
precincts of Civil or Criminal Courts or of revenue-offices, or railway 
stations, landing stages, lodging places or other places of public resort.’. 


3. In section 50 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following sub-section 


Amendment 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


of section 50. 


25 of 96. “(6) On the date on which section 45A of the Advocates Act, 96 comes into 
I8 of 879. force, sections , 3 and 36 of the Legal Practitioners Act, 879 shall stand repealed.”. 


S.K.G. RAHATE, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


Kshitiz 
Moha 
MGIPMRND—454GI—08-2-2023. 


