रजिस्ट्री Fe Ste Uer—( WA) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-27072026-2748 63 
CG-DL-E-27072026-274863 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग ता — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We ॥5] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, जुलाई 27, 2026/श्रावण 5, 948 (शक) 
No. 5] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, JULY 27, 2026/SHRAVANA 5, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 27th July, 2026:— 
BILL No. 39 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 

l. This Act may be called the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair 
Means) Amendment Act, 2026. 

2. In the Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 0,— 

(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “three years but which may extend 
to five years and with fine up to ten lakh rupees. In”, the words “five years but 
which may extend up to ten years and with fine up to fifty lakh rupees, and in” 
shall be substituted; 


l of 2024. 


Short title. 


Amendment of 
section l0. 


Amendment of 
section I]. 


Amendment of 
section |2. 


Insertion of new 
sections !2A and 
2B. 


Fast tracked 
investigation and 
Special Fast 
Track Courts. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(5) in sub-section (2),— 


(7) for the words “one crore rupees”, the words “five crore rupees” 
shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “four years”, the words “eight years” shall be 
substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (3),— 


(i) for the words “three years”, the words “five years” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “one crore rupees. In”, the words “five crore 
rupees, and in” shall be substituted. 


3. In section |] of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(0) for the words “five years”, the words “seven years” shall be 
substituted; 


(ii) for the words “one crore rupees. 7, the words “ten crore rupees, 
and in” shall be substituted. 


4. In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(a) after the words “Central Investigating Agency”, the words “or a 
Special Task Force, as that Government may, by notification, constitute in this 
behalf” shall be inserted; 


(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that where the Central Government constitutes a 
Special Task Force under this sub-section, such investigation shall be 
done only by the Special Task Force so constituted.”. 


5. After section l2 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


न _[206, (J) The investigation of an offence under this Act, shall be 
completed— 


(a) by an officer empowered to investigate under sub-section (/) 
of section 2, within a period of two months from the date on which 
the information was recorded by the officer in-charge of the police 
station; or 


(b) by a Central Investigating Agency, within a period of two 
months from the date of a reference made to it by the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) of the said section; or 


(c) by a Special Task Force, within a period of two months from 
the date of issuance of notification in this behalf by the Central 
Government under sub-section (2) of the said section. 


(2) For the purposes of providing a speedy trial on day-to-day basis, 
every State Government and Union territory Administration shall, in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by 
notification, designate a Court of Session, to be a Special Fast Track Court to 
try offences under this Act. 


(3) A Special Fast Track Court designated under sub-section (2) shall, 
while trying offences under this Act, also try other offences connected thereto 
with which the accused may be charged under the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023 or any other law for the time being in force, at the same trial. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(4) In every trial of an offence under this Act, the proceedings shall be 
continued on day-to-day basis, until all the witnesses in attendance have been 
examined, unless the Special Fast Track Court, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, finds that adjournment of the same beyond the following day is 
necessary: 


Provided that such trial shall be completed within a period of three 
months from the date of filing of the chargesheet. 


(5) The cases or trials pertaining to offences under this Act or any other 
law for the time being in force as specified in sub-section (3), which are 
pending on the date of commencement of the Public Examinations (Prevention 
of Unfair Means) Amendment Act, 2026, shall stand transferred to the Special 
Fast Track Court designated under sub-section (2). 


(6) The trial of cases transferred under sub-section (5) shall be conducted 
by the Special Fast Track Court designated under sub-section (2) from the 
stage it is received upon such transfer and shall be completed within a period 
of three months from the date of such receipt. 


(7) Every State Government and Union territory Administration shall, by 
notification, appoint one or more Special Public Prosecutors for every Special 
Fast Track Court in accordance with sub-section (8) of section 8 of the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, for conduct of cases under this Act. 


(8) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this 
section, shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of 
clause (v) of sub-section (/) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023 and the provisions of that Sanhita shall apply accordingly. 


2B. (J) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, an appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or 
order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Fast Track Court to the 
High Court. 


(2) Every appeal under sub-section (/) shall be heard by a bench of two 
Judges of the High Court and shall, as far as possible, be disposed of within a 
period of three months from the date of admission of the appeal. 


(3) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any Court from 
any judgment, sentence or order including an interlocutory order of a 
Special Fast Track Court. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3) of section 49 
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, an appeal shall lie to the 
High Court against an order of the Special Fast Track Court granting or 
refusing bail. 


(5) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the judgment, sentence or order appealed from: 


Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient 
cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days: 


Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of 
the period of ninety days.”. 


Appeals. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act, 2024 (the said 
Act) was enacted to prevent resorting to unfair means in public examinations and to 
provide for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto. The said Act, being 
a pan-Indian legislation, aims at effectively deterring persons, organised groups and 
institutions from indulging in unfair means thereby committing offences, adversely 
impacting the sanctity of public examinations. The objective of the said Act is to 
bring greater transparency, fairness and credibility and inspire confidence in the 
public examinations system. 


2. In recent years, there have been some incidents of question paper leakages 
and malpractices in examinations conducted by public examination authorities, 
which tend to affect the transparency and fairness of the public examinations 
system. 


3. Hence, in order to further strengthen the fairness, to enhance the credibility 
of the public examinations system and to facilitate speedy trial and ensure time 
bound investigations of offences under the said Act, it is necessary to make 
amendments in the said Act, inter alia,— 


(i) to empower all State Governments and Union territory 
Administrations to designate any Court of Session to be a Special Fast Track 
Court to try offences under the said Act; 


(ii) to provide that the proceedings in such Special Fast Track Courts are 
continued on day-to-day basis and the trial shall be completed within a period 
of three months from the date of filing of the charge sheet; 


(iii) to empower the Central Government to also constitute Special Task 
Force for investigation of any offence, if necessary; 


(iv) to provide that the investigations for offences under the said Act are 
completed within a period of two months; 


(v) to empower all State Governments and Union territory 
Administrations to appoint one or more Special Public Prosecutors for conduct 
of cases under the said Act; 


(vi) to enhance the term of imprisonments and fines provided therein for 
offences committed under the said Act; and 


(vii) to provide for appeal mechanism as against any judgement, 
sentence or order to a bench of two Judges of the High Court, and for disposal 
of the same within a period of three months from the date of admission of 
appeal. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; DR. JITENDRA SINGH. 
The 24th July, 2026. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


MGIPMRND—466GI(S4)—27-07-2026. GORAKH so 
A NATH _ natHyapava 


Date: 2026.07.27 


YADAVA 204256+0530 


