रजिस्ट्री de डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


प्यारत का रालपन 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-29072026-274899 
CG-DL-E-29072026-274899 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 23] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, जुलाई 28, 2026/श्रावण 6, 1948 (शक) 
No. 23] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, JULY 28, 2026/SRAVANA 6, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 28th July, 2026/Sravana 6, 1948 (Saka) 


THE LAKSHADWEEP TOWN AND COUNTRY PLANNING AND 
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION, 2026 


No. 8 oF 2026 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of India. 


A Regulation to provide for the sustainable, orderly and progressive development 
of land, to preserve and improve the amenities thereof, for the grant 
of permission to develop land and for other powers of control over the use 
of land and development of land for planning, so as to secure good 
governance, prevent ecological damage, promote tourism and provide 
proper sanitary conditions, and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 

In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:-— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (2) This Regulation may be called the Lakshadweep Town and Country 
Planning and Development Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(/) “accommodation reservation” means the grant of permission by the 
Government to the owner of a land, that is required for public amenity specified 
in Master Plan or Regional Plan by the Planning and Development Authority or 
local authority, as the case may be, to use the potential of such land in the form of 
built-up space guided by permissible Floor Area Ratio, in addition to the built-up 
space required for such amenity, in lieu of payment of compensation for such land 
and amenity transferred in favour of such authority; 


(2) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the Union territory of 
Lakshadweep appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution; 


(3) “agriculture” includes— 


(7) horticulture, farming, growing of crops, fruits, vegetables, 
flowers, grass, fodder and trees; 


(ii) any kind of cultivation of soil; 


(ii) breeding and keeping of livestock including cattle, horses, 
fish, poultry and bees; and 


(iv) the use of land which is ancillary to the farming of land or any 
other agricultural purposes, 


but does not include the use of any land attached to a building for the purposes 
of garden to be used along with such building; and the expression 
“agricultural” shall be construed accordingly; 


(4) “amenities” include the utilities such as roads, streets, open spaces, 
parks, recreational grounds, playgrounds, supply of water and electricity, 
street lighting, sewerage, drainage, public works and other utilities, services 
and conveniences; 


(5) “Board” means the Lakshadweep Planning and Development Board 
constituted under section 4; 


“building operation” includes— 
g op 
(7) erection or re-erection of a building or any part of it; or 


(ii) roofing or re-roofing of a building or any part of a building, or 
an open space; or 


(iii) any material alteration or enlargement of a building; or 


(iv) any such alteration of a building as is likely to affect an 
alteration of its drainage or sanitary arrangements or materially affect its 
security; or 


(v) the construction of a door opening on any street or land not 
belonging to the owner of a building; 


(7) “Chief Town Planner” means the Chief Town Planner appointed 
under section 3; 


(8) “commerce” means the carrying on of any trade, business or profession, 
sale or exchange of goods of any type, and includes the running of— 


(7) hospitals or nursing homes exceeding twenty-five beds; and 


(ii) hotels, restaurants and boarding houses not attached to 
educational institutions, 


with a view to making profit, and the expression “commercial” shall be 
construed accordingly; 


37 of 2020. 


Reg.5 of 2022. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(9) “commercial use” includes the use of any land or building or part 
thereof for the purposes of commerce, or for storage of goods, or as an office, 
whether attached to any industry or otherwise; 


(10) “development” with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, means the carrying out of building operation or engineering 
operation or other operations in, on, over or under, the land, or the making of 
any material change in any building or land, or in the use of any building or 
land, and includes the sub-division of any land; 


(71) “engineering operation” includes the formation or the laying out of 
means of access to a road or the laying out of means of water supply, drainage, 
sewerage or of electricity cables or lines or of telephone lines; 


(12) “Government” means the Union territory Administration of 
Lakshadweep, headed by the Administrator; 


(73) “industrial use” includes the use of any land or building or part 
thereof for the purposes of any industry; 


(14) “industry” includes the carrying on of any manufacturing process 
as defined in the Occupational Safety, Health and Working Conditions 
Code, 2020, and the expression “industrial” shall be construed accordingly; 


(15) “land” includes benefits arising out of land and things attached to 
the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth; 


(16) “land pooling or readjustment” is a technique for managing the 
planned development of rural or urban lands, whereby a Government agency 
consolidates a selected group of land parcels and then designs, services and 
sub-divides them into a layout of streets, open spaces and serviced building 
plots, with the sale of some of the plots for cost recovery and the distribution 
of the remaining plots back to the land owners to develop or to sell for 
development; 


(17) “land use” means the major use to which a plot of land is being used 
on any specified date; 


(18) “local authority” means a Gram Panchayat constituted under the 
Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 2022; 


(19) “local newspaper” in relation to any planning area, means any 
newspaper published or circulated within that area; 


(20) “Master Plan” means a Master Plan prepared in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter VI; 


(21) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
of Lakshadweep and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation 
and cognate expressions shall be construed accordingly; 


(22) “occupier” includes— 
(7) a tenant; or 


(ii) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land or 
building or part thereof; or 


(iii) a rent-free occupant of any land or building or part thereof; or 


(iv) a licensee in occupation of any land or building or part thereof; or 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(v) any person who is liable to pay damages to the owner for the 
use and occupation of any land or building or part thereof; 


(23) “owner”, in relation to any property, includes the person for the time 
being receiving or entitled to receive, whether on his own account or as agent, 
trustee, guardian, manager, or receiver for another person, or for any religious 
or charitable purpose, the rents or profits of such property; 


(24) “Planning and Development Authority” means any Planning and 
Development Authority constituted under section 24; 


(25) “planning area” means any area declared to be a planning area under 
section 22; 


(26) “plot” means a continuous portion of land held in single or joint 
ownership, other than land used, allotted, earmarked or reserved for any street, 
pathway, public purpose or public utility; 


(27) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Regulation; 


(28) “public place” means any place or building which is open to the use 
and enjoyment of the public, whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the 
public or not, and whether the entry is regulated by any fees or not; 


(29) “reconstituted plot’ means a plot which is altered either in 
ownership or in any other manner by a town planning scheme; 


(30) “Regional Plan” means a plan prepared for the whole of the Union 
territory in accordance with the provisions of Chapter III; 


(31) “relocation of population”, in relation to an area of land which is 
either eco-fragile area or needs to be conserved for preservation of natural 
ecosystem, means making available elsewhere, of accommodation, for 
residential purposes or for carrying on business or other activities, together 
with amenities, to persons living or carrying on business or other activities in 
the said area who have to be so accommodated so that the said area may be 
protected, without prejudice to the right to property; 


(32) “residence” includes the use for human habitation of any land or 
building or part thereof including gardens, grounds, garages, stables and 
out-houses, if any, appertaining to such building and the expression 
“residential” shall be construed accordingly; 


(33) “town planning scheme” means a development or re-development 
scheme at the sub-city level and includes a design, plan or plans, together with 
description, if any, relating to such scheme, prepared in accordance with the 
provisions of Chapter VIII; 


(34) “transferable development right” means a right to transfer the 
potential of a land required for public purpose by the Planning and 
Development Authority or a local authority, as the case may be, expressed in 
terms of total permissible built-up area, for utilisation by the owner himself or 
transfer by him to any other person, from the present location to a specified 
area, as additional built-up space over and above the permissible limit in that 
area in lieu of the payment of compensation for such land; 


(35) “transferable development right for posterity” means the right to 
sell, transfer or surrender the development right or potential of land zoned as 
agricultural land or land in other areas, such as, heritage site, water body, farm 
land falling under the Coastal Regulation Zone to alternate sites as identified 
in the Master Plan or Regional Plan; and 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(36) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Lakshadweep. 
CHAPTER II 
CHIEF TOWN PLANNER AND LAKSHADWEEP PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT BOARD 


3. The Administrator shall, by notification, appoint a Chief Town Planner 
possessing such qualifications in town and country planning, as may be prescribed. 


4. (1) The Government shall, by notification, constitute for the Union territory, 
a Board to be called the Lakshadweep Planning and Development Board. 


(2) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely:— 


(a) Administrator of Union territory of Lakshadweep—Chairperson, 


ex officio; 
(b) Advisor to the Administrator—Vice-chairperson, ex officio; 


(c) Secretary to the Department of Town and Country 
Planning—Member, ex officio; 


(d) Secretary to the Department of Panchayat—Member, ex officio; 


(e) Secretary to the Department of Planning and Statistics—Member, 


ex officio; 
(f) Secretary to the Department of Industry—Member, ex officio; 
(g) Secretary, Public Works Department—Member, ex officio; 
(A) Secretary, Forests Department—Member, ex officio; 
(i) Director, Department of Agriculture—Member, ex officio; 
(j) Director, Department of Tourism—Member, ex officio; 
(k) Director, Department of Transport—Member, ex officio; 
(J) Director, Department of Health Services—Member, ex officio; 


(m) Director, Department of Planning and Statistics—Member, 


ex officio; 
(n) Director, Department of Fisheries—Member, ex officio; 


(०) one person of the District Panchayat to be elected by the Members 
thereof—Member; 


(p) three officers, not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, to be 
nominated by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Defence, 
the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change and the Ministry of 
Housing and Urban Affairs—Members, ex officio; 


(q) two experts having special knowledge and practical experience in 
any field relevant to planning and development to be co-opted by the Members 
specified in clauses (a) to (p)—Members; and 


(r) the Chief Town Planner—Member Secretary, ex officio. 


5. The term of office of the Members of the Board referred to in clauses (0) 
and (q) of sub-section (2) of section 4, the manner of filling casual vacancies among 
them and the allowances payable to them for attending the meetings of the Board 
shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


Appointment of 
Chief Town 
Planner. 


Constitution of 
Lakshadweep 
Planning and 
Development 
Board. 


Term of office, 
allowances, etc., 
of Members of 
Board. 


Resignation by 
Member. 


Meetings of 
Board. 


Functions and 
powers of 
Board. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


6. Any Member of the Board referred to in clauses (0) and (q) of 
sub-section (2) of section 4 may resign his office by giving one month notice in 
writing to the Government and on such resignation being accepted by the 
Government, he shall cease to be a Member. 


7. The Board shall meet at such times and places as it may think fit and observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as 
may be prescribed. 


8. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder, the functions of the Board shall be to guide and direct the Planning and 
Development Authorities, to advise the Government in matters relating to the 
planning, development and use of land in the Union territory, and to perform such 
other functions as the Government may, from time to time, assign to the Board. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provision, the Board may, and shall if required by the Government so to do,— 


(a) direct the preparation of Master Plans by the Planning and 
Development Authorities; 


(6) undertake, assist and encourage the collection, maintenance and 
publication of statistics, bulletins and monographs on planning and its 
methodology; 


(c) co-ordinate and advise on the planning and implementation of 
physical development programmes within the Union territory; 


(d) prepare and furnish reports relating to the working of this Regulation; 


(e) direct preparation of Regional Plan, Master Plan, town planning 
schemes and land pooling schemes for green field area and local area plans for 
redevelopment of brown field areas; 


(f) ensure that the economic vision exercise is undertaken at the Regional 
Plan level and at the Master Plan level; 


(g) ensure that the economic visioning and Regional Plan are consistent 
with one another and compatible in terms of time and planning horizon; 


(A) ensure spatial budgeting on a Geographic Information System (GIS) 
platform is undertaken by the planning and development authorities to monitor 
implementation of plans on half yearly and annual basis; 


(7) ensure synchronisation of the fiscal budget with all levels of spatial 
planning over plan implementation period; 


(7) ensure that the Master Plan, town planning scheme or local area plan 
does not exceed the carrying capacities of the said area in the horizon period 
and such carrying capacity studies may be directed to be undertaken by 
institutions of national or international repute; 


(k) ensure appropriate planning of infrastructure and waste management 
suitable for islands are undertaken; 


(/) annually review the impacts and results of the Regional Plan and 
Master Plan through a list of key performance indicators as may be identified 
during the planning phase, which may include— 


(7) land use compliance; 


(ii) completion of transportation, utility and public facility 
developments; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(iii) implementation of environmental conservation measures; and 
(iv) budget performance and optimum utilisation of resources; and 


(m) perform such other functions, as may be prescribed, which are 
incidental, supplemental or consequential to any of the aforementioned 
functions. 


(3) The Board may exercise all such powers as may be necessary or expedient 
for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Regulation. 


CHAPTER III 
REGIONAL PLANS 


9. (1) The Government may, by order, direct the Chief Town Planner to 
prepare Regional Plans for whole or part of the Union territory and the period within 
which such Regional Plans may be prepared shall be specified in such order. 


(2) The Government may, by order, also withdraw, amend or modify a 
Regional Plan. 


10. (/) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and rules made thereunder, 
the Chief Town Planner shall, after carrying out such surveys as may be necessary 
on the physical, social and economic conditions and potentialities of an area in 
respect of which a Regional Plan referred to in section 9 is to be prepared, prepare 
a Regional Plan for such area, together with a report explaining the various aspects 
of development proposed in such plan. 


(2) The Regional Plan may be prepared for a horizon period of twenty years, 
and may be reviewed every ten years, and revised if required. 


11. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder, the objective of a Regional Plan shall be to indicate— 


(a) the stages by which development may be carried out; 
(6) the network of transport and communication lines; 


(c) the proposals for conservation and development of natural resources; 
and 


(d) such other matters as may have an influence on the development of 
the concerned area. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions, a Regional Plan may provide for all or any of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) integrated planning for rural and urban areas, earmarking areas for 
low and high density development and indication of urbanisable areas, if any; 


(b) economic vision including the existing and potential growth drivers 
of the Union territory or part thereof, their competitiveness for future and 
enabling conditions for growth; 


(c) regional transport and logistics plan including island with mainland 
and intra-islands; 


(d) access of goods and people to major tourist destinations and beaches, 
tourism circuits and their surrounding with their annual footfalls; 


(e) the plan shall be based upon a detailed study on corals undertaken by 
an institute of national or international repute so that any transportation 
channel that leads to destruction of corals is avoided; 


Power to direct 
preparation of 
Regional Plans. 


Preparation of 
Regional Plans. 


Contents of 
Regional Plan. 


Board to 
consider 
Regional Plan. 


Public notice of 
Regional Plan. 


Approval by 
Government. 


Publication of 
Regional Plan. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(f) broad demarcation and listing of permitted and non-permitted 
activities— 


(7) in protected or sensitive areas like coastal regulation zones, 
environmentally sensitive areas, Protected Areas including national 
parks, wildlife sanctuaries, important birding sites, etc.; and 


(ii) in key tourism endowments that are essential to sustain long 
term tourism, such as, beaches, lagoons, reefs, creeks, etc.; 


(g) measures and strategies for rejuvenation and prevention of further 
decay of coral reefs experiencing bleaching events and prevent the 
exploitation of coral reefs for construction or other anthropogenic purposes; 


(A) measures and strategies for prevention of polluted areas and beach 
stretches that need retrofitting and rejuvenation; and 


(7) fishing sites and proposals pertaining to future fishing zones that do 
not harm the coral reefs. 


12. The Chief Town Planner shall refer the Regional Plan prepared under 
section 10 to the Board for its consideration and may make such modifications in 
the Regional Plan as may be necessary on the basis of such recommendations as 
may be made by the Board. 


13. (1) The Chief Town Planner shall notify the Regional Plan as modified 
under section 12, in the Official Gazette, on the website of the Lakshadweep 
Planning and Development Board and also in one or more local newspapers, 
indicating therein the place or places where copies of the same may be inspected 
and inviting comments in writing from the public on it within such period as may 
be specified in the notification: 


Provided that such period shall not be less than two months from the date on 
which the Regional Plan is published in the Official Gazette. 


(2) After the expiry of the period mentioned in sub-section (/), the Chief Town 
Planner shall refer the comments received from the public to the Board for its 
consideration. 


(3) The Chief Town Planner may, if necessary, revise the Regional Plan and 
the report in the light of any modifications suggested by the Board and submit them 
to the Government together with the comments received from the public on such 
Regional Plan for approval. 


14. (7) The Government may, within such period as may be prescribed, either 
approve the Regional Plan as submitted to it under sub-section (3) of section 13, or 
may approve the said plan with such modifications as it may consider necessary, or 
may return the said plan to the Chief Town Planner with instructions either to 
modify the plan or to prepare a fresh Regional Plan in accordance with such 
directions as the Government may issue in this behalf. 


(2) Where a fresh Regional Plan is required to be prepared under 
sub-section (/), the provisions of sections 10 to 14 shall, as far as may be, apply to 
the preparation and approval of such plan. 


15. The Chief Town Planner shall notify the Regional Plan as approved by the 
Government in the Official Gazette, on the website of the Lakshadweep Planning 
and Development Board and also publish in one or more local newspapers, 
indicating therein the place or places where copies of the same may be inspected. 


53 of 1972. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


16. On and from the date of publication of the Regional Plan under section 15 
for an area, all development programmes undertaken within that area by any private 
institution or by any other person shall conform to the provisions of such Regional 
Plan: 


Provided that any public projects or schemes or development works, 
undertaken by the Central Government or the Government, shall be in conformity 
with the applicable rules made or procedures laid down by the Central Government 
or the Government for such projects, schemes or development works. 


17. (1) No person shall undertake any work or development in contravention 
of any of the provisions of the Regional Plan in force, except in case of any project 
or scheme or development work undertaken by the Central Government or the 
Government, either by itself or through its servant or agent or any other person. 


(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/), shall be liable to a 
penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


18. The Chief Town Planner may, after the Regional Plan comes into 
operation, with the prior approval of the Government, by notification, make such 
changes in such Regional Plan as may be necessary for correcting any typographical 
or cartographical errors. 


19. (/) A Regional Plan shall be reviewed after every ten years and shall be 
revised at least every twenty years. 


(2) If the Government, at any time after notification of a Regional Plan under 
section 15, is of the opinion that a revision of such Regional Plan is necessary, it 
may direct the Chief Town Planner to undertake the revision of that Regional Plan 
and thereupon the provisions of this Chapter relating to the preparation of Regional 
Plan shall, as far as may be, apply to the revision of the Regional Plan under this 
section. 


20. (1) No person shall— 
(a) mine corals for use as construction material; or 
(b) dump any solid or liquid waste on beaches or in their vicinity. 


(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/) or abets such 
contravention, and— 


(a) where such contravention relates to the mining of corals for use as 
construction material, he shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions 
of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972; and 


(b) where such contravention relates to the dumping of any solid or 
liquid waste on beaches or in their vicinity, he shall be liable to a penalty which 
may extend to five thousand rupees. 


21. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 19, if, at any time after 
a revised Regional Plan is notified (herein referred to as the revised Regional Plan), 
the Government is of the opinion that such revised Regional Plan is required to be 
withdrawn, the Government may direct the Chief Town Planner to withdraw the 
operation of the revised Regional Plan in its entirety or in part, as the case may be, 
from such date, as the Government appoints, and undertake the revision of the 
Regional Plan as existing immediately before the revised Regional Plan (herein 
referred to as the existing Regional Plan), in its entirety or in part, as the case may 
be, and thereupon the provisions of this Chapter relating to preparation of the 
Regional Plan shall, as far as may be, apply to the revision of the existing Regional 
Plan under this section. 


Effect of 
Regional Plan. 


Development to 
conform to 
Regional Plan. 


Making of minor 
changes in 
Regional Plan. 


Revision of 
Regional Plan. 


Prohibition of 
mining of corals 
for use as 
construction 
material and 
dumping of solid 
and liquid waste 
on beaches and 
in their vicinity. 


Withdrawal of 
revised Regional 
Plan. 


Declaration of 
planning areas, 
their 
amalgamation, 
sub-division, etc. 


Power to 
withdraw 
planning area 
from operation 
of Regulation. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), any land use as per the existing 
Regional Plan shall be accepted and any future modification shall conform to the 
Regional Plan as may be revised. 


(3) The Chief Town Planner shall withdraw the operation of the revised 
Regional Plan in entirety or in part, as the case may be, by notification, from such 
date as may be appointed by the Government under sub-section (/), and publish the 
said notification in two local newspapers. 


(4) On and from the date of withdrawal of the revised Regional Plan under 
sub-section (3), all development programmes undertaken by any Department of the 
Government, or by any public or private institutions, or by any other person, shall 
conform to the provisions of the existing Regional Plan. 


CHAPTER IV 


DECLARATION OF PLANNING AREAS AND CONSTITUTION OF PLANNING AND 
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITIES 


22. (1) The Government may, by notification, declare any area to be a planning 
area for the purposes of this Regulation, and on such declaration, this Regulation 
shall apply to such area: 


Provided that no defence area (cantonment area) or part thereof shall be 
included in such planning area. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall define the limits of 
the area to which the notification relates. 


(3) The Government may, after consultation with the Board, amalgamate two 
or more planning areas into one planning area or sub-divide a planning area into 
different planning areas and may include any such sub-divided area or areas in any 
other planning area. 


(4) The Government may, by notification, direct that all or any of the rules, 
regulations, bye-laws, notifications, orders, directions and powers made, issued or 
conferred and in force in any planning area at the time of amalgamation, 
sub-division or inclusion under sub-section (3), shall apply to the planning area or 
areas aS so amalgamated or sub-divided or included, with such exceptions, 
adaptation or modifications as may be specified in the notification, and thereupon 
such rules, regulations, bye-laws, notifications, orders, directions and powers shall 
apply to such planning area or areas without further publication. 


(5) Where planning areas are amalgamated or sub-divided, or such 
sub-divided areas are included in any other planning area, the Government shall, 
after consulting the Board and the Planning and Development Authorities 
concerned, frame a scheme determining the portion or portions of the balance of the 
fund of the Planning and Development Authorities, which shall vest in the Planning 
and Development Authorities concerned and specify the manner in which the 
properties and liabilities of the Planning and Development Authorities shall be 
apportioned amongst them; and on the scheme being notified, the fund, property and 
liabilities shall vest and be apportioned accordingly. 


23. (1) The Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary so to do in 
the public interest, by notification, withdraw from the operation of this Regulation 
the whole or part of any planning area. 


(2) Where a notification is issued under sub-section (/) in respect of any 
planning area or part thereof,— 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(a) the provisions of this Regulation and all rules, bye-laws, 
notifications, orders, directions and powers made, issued or conferred under 
it, shall cease to apply to the said area or part and the Planning and 
Development Authority, if any, constituted under this Regulation, shall cease 
to have jurisdiction in respect of the said area or part, as the case may be; but 
where any Planning and Development Authority has been constituted 
exclusively for such area or part, such Authority shall, on the date of such 
notification stand dissolved; and 


(b) the Government shall, after consulting the Board, the Planning and 
Development Authority and the local authority or authorities concerned, frame 
a scheme determining the portion or portions of the balance of the fund of the 
Planning and Development Authority concerned which shall vest in the 
Government and in the local authority or authorities concerned, and specify 
the manner in which the properties and liabilities of the Planning and 
Development Authority shall be apportioned between the Government and 
such local authority or authorities, and on the scheme being notified, the fund, 
property and liabilities of the Planning and Development Authority shall vest 
and be apportioned accordingly. 


24. (1) As soon as may be, after the declaration of the planning area, the 
Government may, in consultation with the Board, by notification, constitute in 
respect of that area a Planning and Development Authority for the purpose of 
performing the functions assigned to the Planning and Development Authorities 
under this Regulation. 


(2) Every Planning and Development Authority constituted under 
sub-section (/) shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and 
be sued. 


(3) Every Planning and Development Authority constituted under 
sub-section (/) shall consist of the following, namely:— 


(a) a chairperson to be appointed by the Administrator; 


(0) one member, who shall be the Chief Executive Officer of District 
Panchayat representing a planning area, ex officio; 


(c) one member secretary, who shall be the Town Planning Officer to be 
appointed by the Administrator, in consultation with the Chief Town Planner; 


(d) the following members, who shall be representatives of local 
authorities, namely: — 


(7) in the case of a planning area in which only one local authority 
has jurisdiction, a representative nominated by that local authority from 
among its members; or 


(ii) in the case of a planning area in which two or more local 
authorities have jurisdiction, representatives of such local authorities, as 
the Administrator may consider necessary to be represented; and 


(e) two members, who shall be experts having special knowledge and 
practical experience in matters relating to town and country planning and 
related fields who shall be co-opted by the chairperson and members referred 
to in clauses (a), (b) and (d). 


Constitution of 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(4) The Government may, if it thinks fit, appoint one of the members of the 
Planning and Development Authority as its Vice-chairperson. 


(5) The Government may, in consultation with the Board, appoint any local 
authority as the Planning and Development Authority for the area comprised within 
the local limits of the jurisdiction of such local authority and for such other 
contiguous or adjacent area or areas as the Government may declare as a planning 
area under section 22. 


(6) Where a local authority is appointed as a Planning and Development 
Authority under sub-section (5), the provisions of sub-section (3) and 
sections 25, 27 and 28 shall not apply, and the provisions of the Regulation by which 
such local authority is constituted shall continue to apply to it in respect of matters 
covered by the said sections. 


(7) A local authority appointed as a Planning and Development Authority 
under sub-section (5) shall, for the purpose of performing the functions of a Planning 
and Development Authority under this Regulation, constitute a Planning Committee 
consisting of the following members, namely:— 


(a) a chairperson to be appointed by the Administrator; 


(b) five members, two of whom shall be the members of the local 
authorities functioning in the development area, having such qualifications as 
may be prescribed, to be nominated by the Government in consultation with 
the Board; and 


(c) the Town Planning Officer, who shall be the member secretary to the 
Committee. 


(8) Every Planning Committee constituted by a local authority under 
sub-section (7) shall have the same status and powers of a Standing Committee 
appointed by the local authority by the Regulation under which such local authority 
is constituted and the terms and conditions of the members of the Committee shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 


Term of office 25. (1) The term of office and the conditions of service of the chairperson and 
and conditions 


cad members of a Planning and Development Authority (other than the Town Planning 
of service of हि 

chairperson and Officer) shall be such as may be prescribed. 

bi f 
Hemene nr (2) The chairperson or any member of a Planning and Development Authority 
Development (other than the Town Planning Officer) may resign his office by giving one month 
#णीणोए. notice in writing to the Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall 
cease to be such chairperson or member. 

(3) Any vacancy in the membership ofa Planning and Development Authority 
shall be filled by fresh appointment by the Government, or by nomination by the 
local authority concerned, as the case may be, provided that the member appointed 
or nominated shall hold office only for so long as the member in whose place he is 
appointed or nominated would have held office if the vacancy had not occurred. 

Functions and 26. (1) The functions of every Planning and Development Authority shall, 
powers of subject to the provisions of this Regulation, the rules made thereunder and any 
Sea direction which the Government may issue, shall be— 

Authorities. 


(a) to prepare an existing Land Use Map; 

(b) to prepare a Master Plan for an island or islands; 

(c) to prepare Town Planning Schemes or Local Area Plans; 
(d) to prepare and specify the uses of land within its area; 


(e) to prepare schemes of development and undertake their 
implementation; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(f) to prepare comprehensive mobility plan; 


(g) to prepare basis of Coastal Management Plan, which shall detail local 
area plans of beaches or economic activities along the beaches and may be 
projected and proposed under the Master Plan; 


(A) to ensure community participation in the process of plan formulation 
and implementation through conducting focused group discussions with local 
citizens, and business enterprises by publishing reports in local languages so 
that community can understand and participate in development pro-actively; 


(7) to undertake carrying capacity studies based on which resident and 
floating population including tourist population and make an estimate of the 
infrastructure required for the same; 


(j) to monitor unauthorised constructions through drone surveys and map 
the same in Geographic Information System (GIS) platform of the island, and 
for these purposes, it may carry out or cause to be carried out, surveys of the 
planning area and prepare report or reports of such surveys, and to perform 
such other functions, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Planning and Development Authority shall have the power to 
adjudicate and impose penalties with respect to this Regulation, except clause (a) of 
sub-section (/) of section 20. 


27. (1) Every Planning and Development Authority shall meet at such times 
and at such places, and shall subject to the provisions of sub-sections (2), (3) and 
(4), observe such rules of procedure, as may be prescribed, in regard to the 
regulation of business at its meetings. 


(2) The chairperson, or in his absence, the vice-chairperson, if any, or in the 
absence of the chairperson and vice-chairperson, any member chosen by the 
members present from amongst themselves, shall preside at a meeting of the 
Planning and Development Authority. 


(3) All questions at a meeting of the Planning and Development Authority 
shall be decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and 
in the case of an equality of votes, the person presiding shall have a second or casting 
vote. 


(4) The minutes of the proceedings at each meeting, including the names of 
the members present, shall be kept in a book to be kept for this purpose and such 
minutes shall be signed at the next ensuing meeting by the person presiding at such 
meeting, and shall be open to inspection by any member during office hours. 


28. (1) Subject to such control and restrictions, as may be prescribed, every 
Planning and Development Authority may appoint such number of officers and staff 
as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions and may determine 
their designation and grades with the approval of the Administrator. 


(2) The officers and staff of every Planning and Development Authority shall 
be entitled to receive such salaries and allowances and shall be governed by such 
terms and conditions of service, as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
PRESENT LAND USE 
29. (1) Every Planning and Development Authority shall, as soon as may be, 
and not later than six months from the date of its constitution, or within such further 
period as the Government may from time to time extend, prepare a land use map 
(hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the map) and a land use register (hereafter 


in this Chapter referred to as the register) in such form as may be prescribed, 
indicating the present use of every piece of land in the planning area: 


Meetings of 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


Staff of Planning 
and 
Development 
Authority. 


Preparation of 
map and register 
showing present 
land use. 


Notice of 
preparation of 
map and 
register. 


Power of 
Government to 
prepare map and 
register. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided that where a local authority has been appointed as Planning and 
Development Authority for any planning area and such local authority has prepared 
a map or a register, or both, in respect of the said area before such constitution, the 
map or the register so prepared shall be deemed to be a map or register, respectively, 
for the purposes of this section. 


(2) The monitoring and updation of land use shall be undertaken at least every 
five years or even more frequently in case of rapidly developing areas. 


(3) The Planning and Development Authority shall update the existing land 
use maps, preferably using appropriate latest technology, such as, Geographic 
Information System (GIS), remote sensing and drone surveys to monitor the land 
use. 


30. (1) After the preparation of the map and register under section 29, the 
Planning and Development Authority shall publish a public notice stating that such 
map and register has been prepared, and indicating therein the place or places where 
copies of that map or register, or both may be inspected, and inviting objections in 
writing from any person with respect to the map and the register. 


(2) Objections, if any, with reference to any map or register shall be 
communicated to the Planning and Development Authority within thirty days from 
the date of publication of the notice referred to in sub-section (J). 


(3) After the expiry of the period mentioned in sub-section (2), the Town 
Planning Officer of the Planning and Development Authority or a Committee 
appointed by it for the purpose shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to all the persons who have sent in their objections, make a report to the 
Planning and Development Authority. 


(4) The Planning and Development Authority shall consider the report made 
under sub-section (3) and may make such modifications in the map or register, or 
both, as it considers proper and adopt the map and the register by means of a 
resolution. 


(5) As soon as may be, after the adoption of the map and the register under 
sub-section (4), the Planning and Development Authority shall publish the notice of 
the adoption of the map and the register and of the place or places where copies of 
the same may be inspected and shall submit copies of such map and the register to 
the Board and the Government. 


(6) A copy of the public notice referred to in sub-section (5) shall also be 
published in the Official Gazette and such publication shall be the conclusive proof 
that the map and register have been duly prepared and adopted. 


31. (1) Where a map and a register are to be prepared under this Regulation, 
then,— 


(a) if within the period specified in sub-section (/) of section 29 or 
within such further period as the Government may specify, no map or register 
has been prepared; or 


(0) if at any time, the Government is satisfied that the Planning and 
Development Authority is not taking necessary steps to prepare the map or 
register within that period, or if the Government is of the opinion that such a 
map or register is needed to be prepared by the Chief Town Planner, 


the Government may direct the Chief Town Planner to prepare the map and register. 


(2) The Chief Town Planner shall, after the preparation of the map and 
register, submit the same to the Board, and the Board shall, for the purpose of 
adopting the map and register so prepared, follow the procedure and exercise the 
powers of a Planning and Development Authority specified in section 30. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(3) Any expenses incurred under this section in connection with the 
preparation and publication of a map and register in respect of a planning area shall 
be met by the concerned Planning and Development Authority. 


CHAPTER VI 
PREPARATION OF MASTER PLANS 


32. Every Planning and Development Authority shall, as soon as may be, and 
not later than one year from the date of its constitution, as the case may be, prepare 
after consultation with the local authority or authorities concerned, if any, a Master 
Plan for the planning area within its jurisdiction and submit it to the Government 
through the Board for provisional approval: 


Provided that on an application made by the Planning and Development 
Authority, the Government may, by order, extend the said period by such further 
period or periods as it thinks fit. 


33. (1) A Master Plan shall— 
(a) indicate, define and provide for— 


(7) areas to be reserved for agriculture, public and semi-public open 
spaces, parks, playgrounds, gardens, and other recreational uses, green 
belts and natural reserves and reserves and area for redevelopment, area 
for Town Planning Scheme, Land Pooling Scheme and Local Area Plan; 


(ii) comprehensive land allocation of areas or zones for residential, 
commercial, industrial, agricultural and other purposes; 


(iii) complete road and street pattern and traffic circulation pattern 
for present and future requirements; 


(iv) major road and street improvements; 


(v) areas reserved for public buildings and institutions and for new 
civic development; 


(vi) areas for future development and expansion, and areas for new 
housing; 


(vii) amenities, services and utilities; 


(viii) Economic Visioning Plan delineating strategies to promote 
economic growth and identification of areas for commercial, industrial 
and mixed-use development; 


(ix) detailed Coastal Zone Management Plan or Integrated Island 
Management Plan prepared under the Island Protection Zone or Island 
Coastal Regulation Zone notifications issued by the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change from time to time; 


(x) urban and rural sanitation plan; 
(xi) intra and inter-island logistics plan; 


(xii) comprehensive mobility plan for the Union territory 
highlighting the intra and inter-island transportation network 
requirements; 


(xiii) Sustainable Tourism Plan balancing economic benefits and 
environmental and cultural preservation following the National Strategy 
for Sustainable Tourism, 2022 by the Ministry of Tourism in the 
Government of India; 


(xiv) the blue-green spaces and water management plan; and 


Preparation of 
Master Plan. 


Contents of 
Master Plan. 


16 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(xv) such other matters, as may be prescribed, or as may be directed 
by the Government or the Board to be indicated, defined and provided for; 


(6) include zoning regulations to regulate within each zone, the location, 
height, number of storeys and size of buildings and other structures, size of 
yards, courts and other open spaces and the use of buildings, structures and 
land (which shall meet the criteria of the Union territory characterised by low 
elevations, with maximum elevation ranging from four to six metres above 
Mean Sea Level), atolls, reefs, etc., and detailed soil and geo-technical 
investigations shall be undertaken by the Planning and Development 
Authorities to avoid adhocism in zoning regulations and to ensure safety; 


(c) indicate the stages by which the proposals are intended to be carried 
out, together with the financial implications of each stage; 


(d) obtain all statutory clearances, wherever applicable, under the 
respective enactments and the rules, regulations, notifications or orders made 
thereunder, including the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, the Van 
(Sanrakshan Evam Samvardhan) Adhiniyam, 1980, the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986, and the coastal regulation or island protection 
notifications issued thereunder from time to time, and ensure that any 
development in the Lakshadweep Islands is carried out in accordance with the 
approved Integrated Island Management Plan applicable to the respective 
island. 


(2) The Master Plan may— 
(a) indicate, define and provide for— 


(7) all such matters including planning standards, gross and new 
density and such guiding principles as the Planning and Development 
Authority may consider expedient to be indicated, defined and provided 
for in the Master Plan; 


(ii) detailed development of specific areas for housing, shopping 
centers, industrial areas, civic centers, educational and cultural 
institutions; 


(iii) control of architectural features, elevation and frontage of 
buildings and structures; and 


(iv) a five year development programme within the stages 
indicated in clause (d) of sub-section (/); 


(b) designate, any land as a land subject to acquisition for any public 
purpose, and in particular, but without prejudice to the generality of this 
provision for any of the following purposes, namely:— 


(i) the Union territory or the Government, or for any local authority 
or other authority established by law and public utility concerns; or 


(ii) dealing satisfactorily with slum areas and for re-location of 
population; or 
(iii) providing for open spaces, parks and playgrounds; or 


(iv) securing the use of the land in the manner specified in the 
Master Plan; or 


(v) any of the matters referred to in clause (a); and 


(c) indicate and provide proposal for transferable development right, 
transferable development right for posterity, accommodation reservation, land 
pooling scheme (LPS) or any other similar technique for promoting planned 
development. 


53 of 1972. 
69 of 1980. 
29 of 1986. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


(3) Subject to such rules as may be made for regulating the form and contents 
ofa Master Plan, any such plan shall include such maps and such descriptive matters 
as may be necessary to explain and illustrate the proposals included in that plan. 


34. (J) If a Master Plan is not prepared, published and submitted to the 
Government by a Planning and Development Authority within the period specified 
in section 32, as the case may be, or within the period extended under the proviso 
to the said section, or if the Government is of the opinion that such a plan is needed 
to be prepared by the Chief Town Planner, the Government may authorise the Chief 
Town Planner to prepare such plan and direct the cost thereof to be recovered from 
the Planning and Development Authority concerned out of its funds. 


(2) The Chief Town Planner shall, if so authorised under sub-section (J), 
prepare the Master Plan and submit it to the Board and the Board shall follow in 
respect of the plan so prepared such procedure and exercise such powers as a 
Planning and Development Authority would follow or exercise in respect of a 
Master Plan prepared by it. 


35. (1) As soon as may be, after a Master Plan has been submitted to the 
Government, but not later than the time specified in this behalf, the Government 
may direct the Planning and Development Authority to make such modifications in 
the Master Plan as it thinks fit and thereupon the Planning and Development 
Authority shall make such modifications. 


(2) The Government shall, after the modifications, as directed by it have been 
made, give its approval to the publication of the notice of preparation of a Master 
Plan under section 36. 


36. (1) As soon as may be, after the approval of the Government is obtained 
under section 35, the Planning and Development Authority shall notify the Master 
Plan and also publish it in one or more local newspapers, indicating therein the 
place or places where copies of the same may be inspected, and inviting 
objections in writing to the Master Plan within such period as may be 
specified in the notice: 


Provided that such period shall not be less than two months from the date of 
publication of such notification. 


(2) After the expiry of the period specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section (/), the Planning and Development Authority shall appoint a 
Committee consisting of the Town Planning Officer and not more than two of its 
other members, to consider the objections received under sub-section (/) and to 
report within such time as the Planning and Development Authority may fix in this 
behalf, with regard to the merits or otherwise of the objections. 


(3) The Committee appointed under sub-section (2) shall have the power to 
co-opt any other person and any person so co-opted shall have a right to take part 
in the meetings of the Committee, but shall not have a right to vote. 


(4) The Committee so appointed shall afford a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard to any person, including representatives of Government Departments 
or local authorities, who have submitted any objection and who have made 
requests for being so heard. 


(5) As soon as may be, after the receipt of the report from the Committee, but 
not later than such time, as may be prescribed, the Planning and Development 
Authority shall consider such report and may make such alterations or 
modifications in the Master Plan as it considers proper, and shall submit the 
Master Plan with or without alterations or modifications together with the report of 
the Committee to the Board and to the Government. 


Power of 
Government to 
prepare Master 
Plan. 


Approval of 
Government to 
publication of 
notice of 
preparation of 
Master Plan. 


Public notice of 
preparation of 
Master Plan. 


Approval by 
Government. 


Coming into 
operation of 
Master Plan. 


Appeal. 


Alteration of 
Master Plan and 
making of minor 
changes. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


37. As soon as may be, after the submission of the Master Plan under 
sub-section (5) of section 36, but not later than the time prescribed therein, the 
Government may, after consulting the Board, either approve the Master Plan, or 
approve it with such alterations or modifications as it may consider necessary, or 
may return the Master Plan to the Planning and Development Authority to alter or 
modify the plan or to prepare a fresh plan in accordance with such directions as the 
Government may issue in this behalf. 


38. (1) The Planning and Development Authority shall, immediately after the 
Master Plan has been approved by the Government, publish by notification, and also 
in one or more local newspapers, of the approval of the Master Plan, indicating 
therein the place or places where copies of the Master Plan may be inspected. 


(2) The Master Plan shall come into operation from the date of publication of 
the notification under sub-section (/). 


39. (1) Any person aggrieved by any provisions contained in the Master Plan 
may make an application within one month of the coming into operation of such 
Master Plan, to the District Court questioning the validity of the Master Plan, or any 
of its provisions on the following grounds, namely:— 


(a) that it is not within the powers conferred by this Regulation; or 


(b) that any requirement of this Regulation or of any rules made 
thereunder had not been complied with in relation to the making of such 
Master Plan. 


(2) The District Court, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the 
applicant, Planning and Development Authority concerned, Board and Government 
may— 


(a) stay, until the final determination of the proceedings, the operation 
of the Master Plan or the provisions contained therein, in so far as it affects 
any property of the applicant; and 


(6) quash the Master Plan or any provisions contained therein generally 
or in so far as they affect the property of the applicant, if it is satisfied that the 
Master Plan or any provisions contained therein are not within the powers 
conferred by this Regulation, or the rules made thereunder, or that the interests 
of the applicant have been substantially prejudiced by failure to comply with 
any requirement of this Regulation or of the rules made thereunder. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (/) and (2), a Master Plan shall 
not, either before or after it has been approved, be questioned in any manner, in any 
legal proceedings whatsoever. 


40. (7) The period for the operation of the Master Plan shall be ten years. 


(2) At any time after the date on which a Master Plan for an area comes into 
operation, and at least once in every ten years after that date, the Planning and 
Development Authority shall, after carrying out such fresh surveys, as may be 
considered necessary or as may be directed by the Board or the Government, prepare 
after consultation with the local authorities concerned, if any, and submit to the 
Board and the Government, a Master Plan for any alterations or additions considered 
necessary to the Master Plan in operation. 


(3) The provisions of sections 35 to 39 shall, as far as may be, apply to a Master 
Plan submitted under sub-section (2). 


(4) At any time after the date on which the Master Plan for an area comes into 
operation, the Planning and Development Authority may, in public interest, with the 
prior approval of the Government, by notification, make such minor changes in such 
Master Plan as may be necessary for correcting any typographical or cartographical 
errors and omissions or details of proposals not fully indicated in the Plan or changes 
arising out of the implementation of the proposals in the Master Plan. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


41. Ifthe Government is satisfied that any emergency exists which necessitates 
the suspension of any Master Plan or part thereof, it may, by notification, suspend 
such Master Plan or part, for such period as it thinks fit. 


42. Any land required, reserved or designated in a Master Plan, Town Planning 
Scheme or any other plan prepared under this Regulation, for a public purpose or 
for securing planned development, shall be deemed to be land needed for a public 
purpose and may be acquired in accordance with the provisions of the Right to Fair 
Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and 
Resettlement Act, 2013. 


43. (1) The Planning and Development Authority or a local authority may, 
with the prior approval of the Government and the consent of the owner, acquire his 
land for public purpose and the Government may accord the owner a transferable 
development right, in lieu of the payment of compensation towards such acquisition, 
by issuing a Development Right Certificate in such form and in such manner, as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) The transferable development right may be utilised as additional built-up 
space in such manner, as may be prescribed, by the owner who may utilise it himself 
or transfer it to any other person in full or in part, to use in areas earmarked for the 
purpose in the Regional Plan or Master Plan. 


44. (/) The Planning and Development Authority or a local authority may, 
with the consent of the owner, get transferred his land and amenity in its favour for 
public purpose as specified in the Regional Plan or Master Plan, by way of 
accommodation reservation and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The owner of such land shall develop such amenity and hand it over to the 
Planning and Development Authority or a local authority, free of cost and thereafter 
the owner shall himself utilise the developmental right equivalent to full permissible 
Floor Area Ratio. 


45. A Planning and Development Authority, or a local authority may, with the 
prior approval of the Government and the consent of the owner, withdraw or sever 
the development right or potential in respect of land identified for conservation or 
preservation in the Regional Plan or Master Plan and the Government may allot the 
development right, thus removed, or severed to other area more suitable for 
development by way of transferable development right for posterity in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER VII 
CONTROL OF DEVELOPMENT AND USE OF LAND 


46. On and from the date on which a public notice of the preparation of a 
Master Plan is published under sub-section (/) of section 36, every land use, every 
change in land use and every development in the area covered by the Master Plan 
shall conform to the provisions of this Regulation and the Master Plan as finally 
approved by the Government under section 37: 


Provided that the Planning and Development Authority may allow the 
continuance of the use for a period not exceeding ten years, subject to such terms 
and conditions, as may be prescribed, of any land to the extent to which it was used 
on the date on which such public notice is published. 


47. Subject to the other provisions of this Regulation, no development, in 
respect of, or change of use of, any land shall be undertaken or carried out, in an 
area after the application of this Regulation to such area— 


(a) without obtaining a certificate from the Planning and Development 
Authority concerned that the development charge as leviable under this 
Regulation has been paid or that no such development charge is leviable; and 


Suspension of 
Master Plan in 
emergency by 
Government. 


Power to acquire 
land under Act 
30 of 2013. 


Acquisition of 
land by 
according 
transferable 
development 
right. 


Acquisition by 
way of 
accommodation 
reservation. 


Preservation of 
natural reserves 
and resources for 
posterity. 


Land use to 
conform to 
Master Plan. 


Prohibition of 
development 
without payment 
of development 
charge or 
permission. 


Grant of 
permission. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(0) without obtaining a permission under section 48: 


Provided that no such permission shall be necessary for carrying out any 
work— 


(a) for the maintenance, improvement or other alteration of any building 
which affects only its interior or which do not materially affect the external 
appearance of the building; 


(b) by the Central Government or the Government or any local authority, 
subject to the provisions of sub-section (2) of section 48, any work— 


(7) required for the maintenance or improvement of a road or public 
street, being a work carried out on land within the boundaries of such 
road or public street; or 


(i) for the purpose of inspecting, repairing or renewing any drains, 
sewers, mains, pipes, cables or other apparatus, including the breaking 
open of any street or other land for that purpose; or 


(iii) relating to excavations (including wells) made in the ordinary 
course of agricultural operations; or 


(iv) for the construction of unmetalled roads intended to give 
access to land solely for agricultural purposes; or 


(v) relating to normal use of the land which may be used 
temporarily for other purposes; or 


(vi) in the case of land normally used for one purpose and 
occasionally used for any other purpose, for the use of the land for such 
other purpose on occasions; or 


(vii) for the use, or for any purpose incidental to the use, of a 
building for human habitation, or any other building or land attached to 
such building. 


48. (/) Any person intending to carry out any development in respect of, or 
change of use of, any land, shall make an application in writing or through online 
mode to the Planning and Development Authority for permission in such form and 
containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents and plans, as may 
be prescribed. 


(2) In the case of a Department of the Central Government or Government or 
local authority intending to carry out any development in respect of, or change of 
use of any land, such Department or authority concerned shall inform in writing to 
the Planning and Development Authority of its intention to do so, giving full 
particulars thereof accompanied by such documents and plans, as may be 
prescribed, and shall obtain permission in respect thereof. 


(3) Where the Planning and Development Authority has raised any 
objection in respect of the conformity of the proposed development or change 
of use either to any Master Plan under preparation or to any of the Regulations 
in force at the time, or due to any other material consideration, the Department 
or authority concerned referred to in sub-section (2), shall, either make the 
necessary modifications in the proposals for such development or change of use 
to meet the objections raised by the Planning and Development Authority, or 
submit the proposal for such development or change of use together with the 
objections raised by the Planning and Development Authority to the decision of 
the Government. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


(4) The Government on receipt of any proposal referred to in sub-section (3) 
together with the objections of the Planning and Development Authority shall, in 
consultation with the Chief Town Planner, either approve the proposals with or 
without modifications, or direct the Department or authority concerned, as the case 
may be, to make such modifications in the proposals as they consider necessary in 
the circumstances. 


(5) On an application having been duly made under sub-section (/), and on 
payment of the development charges, if any, as may be assessed under Chapter X, 
the Planning and Development Authority may— 


(a) pass an order— 
(i) granting permission unconditionally; or 


(ii) granting permission subject to such conditions as it may think 
fit to impose; or 


(iii) refusing permission; or 


(6) without prejudice to the generality of clause (a), impose 
conditions— 


(i) to the effect that the permission granted is only for a limited 
period and that after the expiry of that period, the land shall be restored 
to its previous condition or the use of the land so permitted shall be 
discontinued; or 


(ii) for regulating the development or use of any land under the 
control of the applicant or for the carrying out of works on any such land 
as may appear to the Planning and Development Authority expedient for 
the purpose of the permitted development. 


(6) The Planning and Development Authority, in dealing with the applications 
for permission under this section, shall have regard to— 


(a) the provisions of any Master Plan which has come into operation; 


(b) the proposals or provisions which it thinks are likely to be made in 
any Master Plan under preparation, or to be prepared; 


(c) to the relevant bye-laws or regulations of the local authority 
concerned; and 


(d) any other material consideration. 


(7) When permission is granted subject to conditions, or is refused, the 
grounds for imposing such conditions or such refusal shall be recorded in writing in 
the order and such order shall be communicated to the applicant in the manner 
prescribed. 


(8) The Planning and Development Authority shall dispose of every 
application for permission under this section within a period of three months. 


49. (1) An applicant may, within two months from the date of receipt of the 
order passed under section 48, by which he is aggrieved, prefer an appeal to the 
Board. 


(2) An appeal under sub-section (/) shall be preferred in such manner and 
accompanied with such fees, not exceeding ten thousand rupees, as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Board may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the 
appellant and the concerned Planning and Development Authority, pass an order— 


Appeal against 
orders passed 
under section 48. 


22, THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(a) granting permission unconditionally; or 


(6) granting permission subject to such conditions as it may think 
fit; or 

(c) removing the conditions subject to which permission has been 
granted and imposing such other conditions, if any, as it may think fit; or 


(d) refusing permission: 


Provided that the Board shall, within a period of three months from the 
date of filing the same, dispose of every appeal and if not so disposed, it shall 
be deemed that the prayer of the appellant is granted. 


Validity of 50. Every permission granted under this Regulation shall remain in force 
iti for a period of three years from the date of such permission: 


Provided that the Planning and Development Authority may, on an 
application made to it in this behalf before the expiry of the said period, extend 
such period, by such period or periods as it may think proper; so, however, that 
the total period extended shall in no case exceed three years: 


Provided further that the lapse of any such permission shall not bar any 
subsequent application for fresh permission under this Regulation. 


Obligation to 51. (J) Where any person, aggrieved by an order in appeal under 
nea a on section 49 refusing to grant permission or granting permission subject to 
Tetusal 0 “ae . 

permission or on conditions, claims— 

grant of 


पति (a) that the land has become incapable of being reasonably beneficial 
certain cases. used in the existing state; or 


(0) in a case where permission was granted subject to conditions, that 
the land cannot be rendered capable of reasonably beneficial use by 
carrying out the development in accordance with such conditions, 


he may, within three months from the date of passing of such order and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed, serve on the Government, a notice requiring the 
Government to acquire his interest in such land (herein and in section 58, 
referred to as an acquisition notice). 


(2) A copy of the acquisition notice shall also be served on the Board and 
the Planning and Development Authority concerned. 


(3) After receiving the notice under sub-section (/), the Government shall 
appoint a person who shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard 
to the person serving the acquisition notice, the concerned Planning and 
Development Authority and the Board, submit a report thereon to the 
Government. 


(4) After receiving the report under sub-section (3), the Government 
shall— 


(a)(i) if it is satisfied that any of the conditions specified in 
clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (/) is not fulfilled; or 


(ii) if the order appealed against was passed on the ground that any 
of the provisions of this Regulation or the rules made thereunder had not 
been complied with, pass an order refusing to confirm the notice; or 


(b) if it is satisfied that any of the conditions specified in clause (a) 
or clause (b) of sub-section (/) is fulfilled, pass an order— 


(i) confirming the notice; or 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(ii) directing the Planning and Development Authority to grant 
such permission or to alter the conditions in such a way as will keep the 
land or part thereof capable of being reasonably beneficial used. 


(5) Where, the Government had not passed any order under sub-section (4) 


within the period of one year from the date on which an acquisition notice is served 
under sub-section (/), the acquisition notice shall be deemed to have been confirmed 
on the expiration of such period. 


(6) On an acquisition notice being confirmed under sub-section (4) or deemed 


to have been confirmed under sub-section (5), the Government shall proceed to 
acquire the land or part thereof in respect of which the notice has been confirmed, 
within one year of such confirmation. 


52. (1) Where an order in appeal under section 49 refusing to grant permission to 


develop the land or granting of such permission subject to conditions, relates to— 


the owner may, if he had not served an acquisition notice under section 51, or if he 
had served such notice and the same had not been conformed under that section, 
within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed, claim compensation 
with the Planning and Development Authority for the refusal of such permission 


(a) the re-erection of a building which has been destroyed or demolished 
and such re-erection does not exceed the cubic content of the original building 
by more than one-tenth; or 


(b) the enlargement, improvement or other alteration of any building 
which was in existence on the date of coming into operation of the Master Plan 
for the first time, and such enlargement or improvement or alteration does not 
exceed the cubic content of that building by more than one-tenth; or 


(c) the carrying out on any land, used for the purposes of agriculture, of 
any building or other operation required for that purpose, other than operations 
for the erection, enlargement, improvement or alteration of a building for 
human habitation or of a building used for the purpose of marketing the 
produce of land; or 


(d) any part of any building or other land, which on the date of coming 
into operation of the Master Plan for the first time, is used for a particular 
purpose, the use for that purpose of any additional part of the building or land 
not exceeding one-tenth of the cubic content of the part of the building used 
for that purpose on that date or, as the case may be, one-tenth of the area of 


the land so used on that date, 


or for the grant thereof subject to conditions: 


Provided that no such compensation shall be claimed if such refusal or grant 


of permission subject to conditions was by reason of any provision in the Master Plan. 


(2) The compensation, if any, payable under sub-section (/) shall be equal to— 


(a) where permission is refused, the difference between the value of the 
land had the permission been granted and the value of the land in its existing 
state; or 


(0) where permission is granted subject to conditions, the difference 
between the value of the land had the permission been granted unconditionally 
and the value of the land when permission is granted subject to conditions. 


(3) When a claim under sub-section (/) is received by the Planning and 


Development Authority, it shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the 
claimant, assess the amount of compensation payable and offer it to the claimant. 


Compensation 
for refusal of 
permission or 
grant of 
permission 
subject to 
conditions in 
certain cases. 


Sanction for 
sub-division of 
plot or layout of 
private street and 
restriction on 
registration of 
purchase, sale or 
transfer of 
immovable 
property. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(4) If the claimant does not accept the compensation offered under 
sub-section (3) and gives notice, within such time as may be prescribed, of such 
refusal, the Planning and Development Authority shall refer the matter for the 
adjudication of the District Court and the decision of that Court shall be final 
and binding on the owner and the Planning and Development Authority. 


53. (J) Any person intending to sub-divide his plot, or make or layout a 
private street, on or after the date on which a public notice of the preparation of 
a Master Plan is published under sub-section (/) of section 36, shall submit the 
layout plan together with such particulars, as may be prescribed, to the Planning 
and Development Authority, for sanction. 


(2) The Planning and Development Authority may within the period 
referred to in sub-section (/), sanction such plan either with or without 
modifications and conditions as it considers expedient, or may refuse to give 
sanction, if it is of the opinion that such sub-division, making or layout is not in 
conformity with the proposals contained in a Master Plan. 


(3) Where the sanction is granted subject to conditions or refused, the 
grounds for imposing such conditions or such refusal shall be recorded in writing 
in the order and such order shall be communicated to the applicant in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) If any person does any work in contravention of the provisions of 
sub-section (/), or in contravention of the modifications and conditions of the 
sanction granted under sub-section (2), or in spite of the refusal of sanction 
under the said sub-section, the Planning and Development Authority may direct 
such person by notice in writing to stop such work in progress, and after making 
an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, remove or pull down any work 
or restore the land to its original condition. 


(5) Any expenses incurred by the Planning and Development Authority 
under sub-section (4) shall be a sum due to the Planning and Development 
Authority under this Regulation from the person in default. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, where any document required to be registered under the 
provisions of sub-section (/) of section 29 of the Registration Act, 1908, 
purports to transfer, assign, limit or extinguish the right, title or interest of any 
person, in respect of plots which are not as per Survey Plan issued by the Survey 
Department or plots which have no development permissions for such 
sub-division— 


(a) from the Planning and Development Authority within a planning area; or 


(6) from the Town and Country Planning Department, within an area 
other than planning area, 


no registering officer appointed under the Regulation, shall register any 
document, unless the owner of such plot produces a certificate of sanction or a 
certificate of no objection from the Planning and Development Authority 
exercising jurisdiction in respect of the planning area or from the Chief Town 
Planner or such other officer as may be authorised in this behalf: 


Provided that no such certificate of sanction or no objection shall be 
required to be produced, if the sub-division of land, or the making or layout of 
any property, results from the right of inheritance within a family: 


Provided further that no such certificate of sanction or no objection shall 
be required to be produced for the purpose of mortgaging immovable property 
in favour of any financial institution notified by the Government, for the 
purposes of this Regulation. 


16 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


54. (/) If it appears to the Planning and Development Authority that, having 
regard to the Master Plan prepared or under preparation or to be prepared and any 
other material consideration, it is necessary and expedient that any permission to 
develop land granted under this Regulation or any other law, ought to be revoked or 
modified, it may, by order, revoke or modify such permission to such extent as 
appears to it to be necessary: 


Provided that— 


(a) where the permission relates to the carrying out of building or other 
operations, no such order— 


(7) shall affect such of the operations as have been previously 
carried out; or 


(ii) shall be passed after such operations have been completed; 


(b) where the permission relates to a change of use of land, no such order 
shall be passed at any time after such change has taken place. 


(2) When a permission is revoked or modified by an order made under 
sub-section (/), the owner may, within such time and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed, claim compensation for the expenditure incurred in carrying out any 
work in accordance with such permission and which has been rendered abortive by 
the revocation or modification of such permission. 


(3) Where a claim under sub-section (2) is received by the Planning and 
Development Authority, it shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to 
the claimant, assess the amount of compensation payable and offer it to the 
claimant. 


(4) If the claimant does not accept the compensation offered under 
sub-section (3) and gives notice, within such time, as may be prescribed, of such 
refusal, the Planning and Development Authority shall refer the matter for the 
adjudication of the District Court and the decision of that Court shall be final and 
binding on the claimant and the Planning and Development Authority. 


55. (J) Any person who, either by himself or at the instance of any other 
person, commences, undertakes or carries out development of, or changes the use 
of any land— 


(a) in contravention of any Master Plan; or 


(0) without obtaining a certificate regarding development charge under 
section 47; or 


(c) without the permission as required under this Regulation; or 


(d) in contravention of any condition subject to which such permission 
has been granted; or 


(e) after the permission for development has been revoked under 
section 54; or 


(f) in contravention of the permission which has been modified under 
section 54, 


shall be liable to a penalty, which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of 
a continuing contravention, with a further penalty which may extend to twenty 
thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention is continued after 
the first such contravention. 


Power to revoke 
or modify 
permission to 
develop. 


Penalty for 
unauthorised 
development, 
ete. 


Power to require 
removal of 
unauthorised 
development. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Any person who continues to use or allows the use of any land or building 
in contravention of the provisions of a Master Plan without having been allowed 
under section 46, or where the continuance of such use has been allowed under that 
section, continues such use after the period for which the use has been allowed or 
without complying with the terms and conditions under which the continuance of 
such use is allowed, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with a further penalty which 
may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such contravention 
is continued after the first such contravention. 


56. (1) Where any development or change of use of land has been carried out 
in any manner specified in clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (/) of section 55, the 
Planning and Development Authority may, within four years of such development 
or change, serve on the owner a notice requiring him, within such period, being not 
less than one month from the date of service of such notice as may be specified 
therein, to take any of the following steps as may be specified in the notice, 
namely:— 


(a) in the cases specified in clause (a) or clause (c) or clause (e) of the 
said sub-section, to restore the land to its condition before the said 
development took place; 


(b) in the cases specified in clause (d) or clause (f) of the said 
sub-section, to secure compliance with the conditions subject to which the 
permission was granted or with the permission as so modified; 


(c) in the cases specified in clause (6), to pay the development charge 
and such penalty, if any, as may be prescribed, 


and in particular, such notice may, for any of the said purposes require— 
(7) the demolition or alteration of any building or work; or 
(ii) the carrying out on land, of any building or other operations; or 
(iii) the discontinuance of any use of land: 


Provided that in case the notice required the discontinuance of the use of any 
land, the Planning and Development Authority shall serve a notice on the occupier 
also. 


(2) Any person aggrieved by a notice served under sub-section (/) may within 
such period and in such manner, as may be prescribed— 


(a) apply for permission under section 48 for the retention on the land, 
of any building, or work, or for the continuance of any use of the land, to which 
the notice relates; or 


(b) appeal to the Board. 


(3) Where an application for permission has been made under clause (a), or an 
appeal has been preferred under clause (6), of sub-section (2), the notice served 
under sub-section (/) shall have no effect until the final determination or withdrawal 
of the application or the appeal, as the case may be. 


(4) Where permission is granted on an application referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (2), the notice issued under sub-section (/) shall not have effect and 
where such permission is granted for the retention of only some building, or work, 
or for the continuance of use of only a part of the land, such notice shall not have 
effect regarding such building or work or such part of the land, but shall have full 
effect regarding other buildings or works or other parts of the land. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


(5) Where an appeal has been preferred under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the 
Board may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the appellant and 
the Planning and Development Authority concerned, and after recording reasons 
therefor, allow or dismiss the appeal, either by quashing or varying the notice, as it 
may think fit. 


(6) If within the period specified in the notice, or within such period after the 
disposal or withdrawal of an application for permission or an appeal under 
sub-section (2), as may be prescribed, the notice or so much of it as continues to 
have effect or the notice with variations made in such appeal is not complied with, 
the Planning and Development Authority may— 


(a) penalise the owner for not complying with the notice with a penalty 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees and in case the notice required the 
discontinuance of any use of land, also penalise any other person who uses the 
land or causes or permits the land to be used in contravention of the notice and 
in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional penalty which 
may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continues after service of notice; and 


(b) in the case of a notice requiring the demolition or alteration of any 
building or work or other operations, itself cause the restoration of the land to 
its condition before the development took place and secure the compliance 
with the conditions of the permission or with the permission modified by 
taking such steps as the Planning and Development Authority may consider 
necessary including demolition or alteration of any building or works or 
carrying out of any building or other operations and may recover the cost of 
any expenses incurred by it in this behalf from the owner as arrears of land 
revenue. 


(7) Whoever contravenes the provisions of clause (a) of sub-section (6) shall 
be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and in the case of a 
continuing contravention with a further penalty which may extend to five hundred 
rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after the first such 
contravention. 


57. (1) Where any development or change of use of land is being carried out 
in any manner specified in clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (/) of section 55, but has 
not been completed, the Planning and Development Authority may serve on the 
owner and the person carrying out the development or change, a notice requiring 
such development or change of use of land to be discontinued from the date of 
service of such notice. 


(2) Where a notice has been served under sub-section (/), the person aggrieved 
by such notice may appeal to the Board and the provisions of sub-sections (5) and 
(6) of section 56 shall apply with such modifications as may be necessary. 


(3) Any person, who continues to carry out the development of land, whether 
for himself or on behalf of the owner or any other person, even after a notice has 
been served under sub-section (/), shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees and when the non-compliance is a continuing one, with a further 
penalty which may extend to five hundred rupees for every day after the date of the 
service of the notice during which the non-compliance has continued or continues. 


(4) If a notice under sub-section (/) is not complied with forthwith, the 
Planning and Development Authority or such officer of the said Authority as may 
be authorised by it in this behalf, may require any police officer to remove such 
person and all assistants and workmen from the land and such police officer shall 
comply with such requisition. 


Power to stop 
unauthorised 
development. 


Power to require 
removal of 
authorised 
development or 
use. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(5) Where action had been taken by a police officer under sub-section (4), the 
Planning and Development Authority or the officer referred to in that sub-section 
shall take necessary steps to ensure that such development is not continued. 


(6) Any expenses incurred by the Planning and Development Authority under 
sub-sections (4) and (5) shall be paid by the person at whose instance such 
development is being continued or to whom notice under sub-section (/) was given 
and shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of land revenue. 


58. (/) If it appears to a Planning and Development Authority that it is 
expedient in the interests of the proper planning of its area (including the interests 
of amenities) or having regard to the Master Plan prepared, or to be prepared and on 
any other material consideration— 


(a) that any use of land should be discontinued; or 
(b) that any condition is to be imposed on the continuance of use of any land; or 
(c) that any building or work is to be altered or removed, 
it may, by notice served on the owner— 
(7) require the discontinuance of that use; or 


(ii) impose such conditions, as may be specified in the notice, on the 
continuance of the use of the land; or 


(iii) require such steps, as may be specified in the notice to be taken, for 
the alteration or removal of any building or work, as the case may be, 


within such period, being not less than one month from the date of service of such 
notice, as may be specified therein. 


(2) Any person aggrieved by such notice may appeal to the Board within such 
period and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


(3) If an appeal is filed under sub-section (2), the provisions of 
sub-sections (5) and (6) of section 56 shall apply, with such modifications as may 
be necessary. 


(4) If any person,— 


(a) who has suffered damage in consequence of the compliance with the 
notice by the depreciation of any interest in the land to which he is entitled, or 
by being disturbed in his enjoyment of the land; or 


(b) who has carried out any work in compliance with the notice, claims 
from the Planning and Development Authority, within such time and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed, compensation in respect of that damage, or of 
any expenses reasonably incurred by him for complying with the notice, 


the provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 54 shall apply with such 
modifications as may be necessary. 


(5)(a) If any person interested in the land in respect of which a notice is issued, 
claims that by reason of compliance with the notice, the land will become incapable 
of being reasonably beneficial used, he may within the period specified in the notice 
or within such period after the disposal of the appeal, if any, filed under 
sub-section (2), and in such manner, as may be prescribed, serve on the Government, 
an acquisition notice requiring his interest in the land to be acquired. 


(b) When a notice is served under clause (a), the provisions of 
sub-sections (2) to (6) of section 51 shall apply with such modifications as may be 
necessary. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


59. Where a Planning and Development Authority, in the exercise of its 
functions and powers with respect to any area under it, is required to have regard to 
the provisions of a Master Plan before such Master Plan has become operative, the 
Planning and Development Authority shall have regard to the provisions, which in 
its opinion is required to be included in such plan for securing the proper planning 
of the concerned area. 


CHAPTER VIII 
TOWN PLANNING SCHEMES 


60. (J) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation, a Planning and 
Development Authority may for the purpose of implementing the proposals 
contained in the Master Plan, make one or more town planning schemes for the area 
within its jurisdiction or any part thereof, and shall submit such schemes in their 
draft form to the Government along with a plan showing the area proposed to be 
included. 


(2) Every town planning scheme shall consist of the following stages, 
namely:— 


(a) the draft town planning scheme prepared and published in 
accordance with section 62; 


(b) the preliminary town planning scheme to be sanctioned under 
sub-section (2) of section 73; and 


(c) the final town planning scheme to be sanctioned under 
sub-section (3) of section 73. 


(3) A town planning scheme may be made in accordance with the provisions 
of this Regulation in respect of any land, which is— 


(7) in the course of development; or 


(ii) likely to be used for residential, commercial, industrial or building 
purposes; or 


(iii) already built upon. 


Explanation For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “land 
likely to be used for building purposes” shall include any land likely to be used as, 
or for the purpose of providing, open spaces, roads, streets, parks, pleasure or 
recreation grounds, parking spaces or for the purpose of executing any work upon 
or under the land incidental to a town planning scheme, whether in the nature of a 
building work, or not. 


(4) A town planning scheme may make provision for any of the following 
matters, namely: — 


(a) the laying out or re-laying out of land, either vacant or already built 
upon, without prejudice to the right to property; 


(b) the filling up or reclamation of low-lying, swampy or unhealthy 
areas, or levelling up of land; 


(c) lay-out of new streets or roads, construction, diversion, extension, 
alteration, improvement and closing up of streets and roads and 
discontinuance of communications; 


(d) the construction, alteration and removal of buildings, bridges and 
other structures, without prejudice to the right to property; 


Interim 
provision 
pending 
preparation of 
Master Plan. 


Making of town 
planning scheme 
and its contents. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(e) the allotment or earmarked of land for roads, open spaces, gardens, 
recreation grounds, schools, markets, green-belts, dairies, transport facilities 
or any other public purpose; 


(f) drainage, inclusive of sewerage, surface or sub-soil drainage and 
sewage disposal; 


(g) lighting; 
(A) water supply; 


(7) the preservation of objects of historical or national interest or natural 
beauty, and of buildings actually used for religious purposes; 


(7) the reservation of land to the extent of ten per cent., or such 
percentage as near thereto as possible of the total area covered under the 
scheme, for the purpose of providing housing accommodation to the members 
of socially and economically backward classes of people and of such other 
class of people as may be determined by the Government; 


(७०00) the allotment of land from the total area covered under the scheme, 
to the extent of— 


(A) fifteen per cent. for roads; 
(B) five per cent. for parks, play grounds, gardens and open space; 


(C) five per cent. for social infrastructure such as school, 
dispensary, fire brigade, public utility place as earmarked in the draft 
town planning scheme and also for industrial development; and 


(D) fifteen per cent. for sale by appropriate authority for 
residential, commercial or industrial use, depending upon the nature of 
development: 


Provided that the percentage of the allotment of land specified in 
items (A) to (C) may be altered depending upon the nature of development and 
for the reasons to be recorded in writing; 


(ii) the proceeds from the sale of land referred to in item (D) of 
sub-clause (i) shall be used for the purpose of providing infrastructural 
facilities; and 


(iii) the land allotted for the purposes referred to in items (9) and (C) of 
sub-clause (7) shall not be changed by variation of schemes for any purpose 
other than public purpose; 


(0) the imposition of conditions and restrictions in regard to the open 
space to be maintained around buildings, the percentage of building area for a 
plot, the number, size, height and character of building allowed in specified 
areas, the purposes to which buildings or specified areas may or may not be 
appropriated, the sub-division of plots, the discontinuance of objectionable 
uses of lands in any area in specified periods, parking spaces and loading and 
unloading space for any building and the sizes or locations of projections and 
advertisement signs; 


(m) the suspension, so far as may be necessary, for the proper carrying 
out of the scheme, of any rule, bye-law, regulation, notification or order made 
or issued by the Government: 


Provided that any suspension under this clause shall cease to operate in 
the event of the Government refusing to sanction the preliminary scheme, or 
in the event of the withdrawal of the scheme under section 87, or on the 
coming into force of the final scheme; and 


(n) such other matters not inconsistent with the objects of this 
Regulation, as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


61. (J) As soon as may be, after a draft town planning scheme has been 
submitted to the Government under section 60, but not later than such period, as 
may be prescribed, the Government may, either give its consent to the publication 
of such draft scheme or direct the Planning and Development Authority to make 
such modifications in that draft scheme as it thinks fit and thereupon the Planning 
and Development Authority shall make those modifications. 


(2) Where the Government gives any direction to make modifications in the 
draft town planning scheme under sub-section (/), it shall, after such modifications 
have been made by the Planning and Development Authority, give its consent for 
publication of such draft scheme. 


62. As soon as may be, after the consent of the Government to the publication 
of the draft town planning scheme was given under section 61, the Planning and 
Development Authority shall notify the said draft scheme and also publish it in one 
or more local newspapers the said draft scheme indicating therein the place or places 
where copies of the same may be inspected, and inviting objections in writing from 
any person with respect to that draft scheme within such period as may be specified 
in the said notification: 


Provided that no such period shall be less than two months from the date on 
which the draft town planning scheme is notified: 


Provided further that no such notification under this section in respect of the 
draft scheme shall be required where land covered by the draft town planning 
scheme had already been acquired and the execution of the scheme does not affect 
the interests of any person. 


63. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 61 and 62, the 
Government may, after making such inquiry as it deems necessary, by notification, 
require any Planning and Development Authority functioning within a planning 
area, to make and publish in such manner, as may be prescribed, and submit for its 
sanction a draft scheme in respect of any area in regard to which a town planning 
scheme is required to be made. 


(2) If the Planning and Development Authority fails to submit a draft town 
planning scheme to the Government within three months from the date of 
notification under sub-section (/), the Government may, by notification, appoint an 
officer to make and submit a draft town planning scheme to it, and thereupon the 
provisions of this Regulation shall, so far as may be, apply to the making of such 
scheme. 


64. A draft town planning scheme shall contain the following particulars, 
namely:— 


(a) the area, ownership and tenure of each original plot; 


(b) the particulars of land allotted or reserved under clause (e) of 
sub-section (4) of section 60 with a general indication of the uses to which 
such land is to be put and the terms and conditions subject to which such land 
is to be put to such uses; 


(c) the extent to which it is proposed to alter the boundaries of original plots; 


(d) an estimate of the net cost of the scheme to be borne by the Planning 
and Development Authority; 


(e) a full description of all the details of the scheme under 
sub-section (4) of section 60 as may be applicable; 


(f) the laying out or re-laying out of land either vacant or already built upon; 


(g) the filling up or reclamation of low-lying, swampy or unhealthy areas 
or levelling up of land; and 


(A) such other particulars, as may be prescribed. 


Consent of 
Government to 
publication of 
draft scheme. 


Publication of 
draft town 
planning 
scheme. 


Power of 
Government to 
require Planning 
and 
Development 
Authority to 
make scheme. 


Contents of draft 
town planning 
scheme. 


Reconstitution 
of plots. 


Disputed 
ownership. 


Objections to 
draft town 
planning scheme 
to be considered. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


65. (/) In the draft town planning scheme referred to in section 64, the size 
and shape of every plot shall be determined, so far as may be, to render it suitable 
for building purposes and where the plot as already built upon, to ensure that the 
building, as far as possible, complies with the provisions of such scheme as 
regards open spaces. 


(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the draft town planning scheme may 
contain proposals— 


(a) to form a final plot by the reconstitution of an original plot by the 
alteration of its boundaries, if necessary; 


(6) to form a final plot from an original plot by the transfer of any 
adjoining lands; 


(c) to provide with the consent of the owners that two or more original 
plots which are owned by several persons or owned by persons jointly be 
held in ownership in common as a final plot, with or without alteration of 
boundaries; 


(d) to allot a final plot to any owner dispossessed of land in furtherance 
of such scheme; and 


(e) to transfer the ownership of a plot from one person to another. 


(3) Where under clause (/) of sub-section (4) of section 60, the purpose for 
which buildings or specified areas may not be appropriated have been specified, 
the buildings shall cease to be used for a purpose other than the purposes specified 
in the draft town planning scheme within such time as may be specified in the final 
scheme and the person affected by the provision shall be entitled to compensation 
from the Planning and Development Authority in such manner and method, as 
may be prescribed: 


Provided that in ascertaining such compensation, the period within which 
the person affected was permitted to change the use shall be taken into 
consideration. 


66. (1) Where there is a disputed claim to the ownership of any place of land 
included in an area in respect of which, the Planning and Development Authority 
has published a draft town planning scheme under section 62 and any entry in the 
record of rights or mutation relevant to such disputed claim is inaccurate or 
inconclusive, on an application being made by the Planning and Development 
Authority or the Town Planning Officer at any time prior to the date on which the 
Town Planning Officer draws up the preliminary scheme under section 72, an 
inquiry may be held by such officer as the Government may appoint for the 
purpose of deciding as to who shall be deemed to be the owner of such land for the 
purposes of this Regulation. 


(2) A decision referred to in sub-section (/) shall not be subject to appeal but 
shall be subject to a civil suit in a Court of competent jurisdiction. 


(3) A decision referred to in sub-section (/) shall, in the event of a Civil 
Court passing a decree which is inconsistent therewith, be corrected, modified or 
rescinded in accordance with such decree as soon as practicable. 


67. Where any person affected by a draft town planning scheme 
communicates in writing, within one month from the date of publication of that 
draft scheme, any objections relating to such draft scheme to the Planning and 
Development Authority, the said Authority shall consider such objections and may 
at any time before submitting the said draft scheme to the Government, modify 
such scheme as it thinks fit: 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


Provided that the Planning and Development Authority may, in such 
circumstances as may be prescribed, and with the previous sanction of the 
Government, reduce the said period of one month to fifteen days for inviting 
objections to the draft scheme. 


68. (7) The Planning and Development Authority shall, within three months 
from the date of notification of the draft town planning scheme, submit such draft 
scheme with any modifications that may have been made therein under section 67 
together with the objections which may have been communicated to it, to the 
Government for sanction. 


(2) After receiving the draft town planning scheme and after making such 
enquiry as it thinks fit, the Government may, within three months from the date of 
its receipt, by notification, sanction such scheme with or without modifications, or 
subject to such conditions as it may think fit, to impose or refuse to sanction it: 


Provided that the Government may, if deemed fit, by notification, return the 
scheme to the Planning and Development Authority with direction to carry out 
such modifications as may be necessary, including the direction to include or 
exclude any land in question in the draft scheme and the Planning and 
Development Authority shall comply with such directions of the Government and 
shall, after following the procedure as laid down under section 63, submit the draft 
scheme, as modified, within the specified time limit to the Government. 


(3) If the Government sanctions such draft scheme, it shall in such 
notification state at what place and time the draft scheme shall be open for the 
inspection of the public. 


69. (1) Where a draft town planning scheme has been sanctioned by the 
Government under sub-section (3) of section 68 (herein referred to as the 
sanctioned draft scheme), all lands required by the Planning and Development 
Authority for the purposes specified in clause (c), (), (8) or (1) of sub-section (4) 
of section 60 shall vest absolutely in the Planning and Development Authority free 
from all encumbrances. 


(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall affect any right of the owner of the land 
vesting in the Planning and Development Authority under that sub-section. 


(3) The provisions of sections 91 and 92 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the 
sanctioned draft town planning scheme as if it was a preliminary town planning 
scheme. 


70. (1) On or after the date on which a draft town planning scheme is 
published under section 62, no person shall, within the area included in the 
scheme, carry out any development unless such person has applied for and 
obtained the necessary permission for doing so from the Planning and 
Development Authority in such form and on payment of such scrutiny fees, as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) Where an application for permission under sub-section (/) is received by 
the Planning and Development Authority, it shall send to the applicant a written 
acknowledgment of its receipt and after making such inquiry as it deems fit and in 
consultation with the Town Planning Officer, if any, may either grant, or refuse to 
grant such permission, or grant permission subject to such conditions as it may 
think fit to impose: 


Provided that any such permission or condition thereto shall be in 
accordance with the draft town planning scheme sanctioned under sub-section (2) 
of section 68 and in line with the notification of the Government while according 
such sanction. 


Power of 
Government to 
sanction draft 
town planning 
scheme. 


Vesting of land 
in Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


Restrictions on 
use and 
development of 
land after 
declaration of 
town planning 
scheme. 


Appointment of 
Town Planning 
Officer. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(3) If the Planning and Development Authority does not communicate its 
decision to the applicant within three months from the date of acknowledgment of 
its receipt, such permission shall be deemed to have been granted to the applicant. 


(4) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub-section (/) or of any 
condition imposed under sub-section (2), the Planning and Development Authority 
may direct such person by notice in writing to stop any development in progress, 
and after making an inquiry in such manner, as may be prescribed, remove, pull 
down, or alter any building or other development, or restore the land or building in 
respect of which such contravention is made to its original condition. 


(5) Any expenses incurred by the Planning and Development Authority 
under sub-section (4) shall be a sum due to it under this Regulation from the 
person in default. 


(6) The provisions of section 55 shall so far as may be, apply in relation to 
the unauthorised development or use of land included in a town planning scheme. 


(7) The restrictions imposed by this section shall cease to operate in the 
event of the Government refusing to sanction the draft town planning scheme or 
the preliminary town planning scheme, or in the event of the withdrawal of the 
scheme under section 87. 


(8) Any diminution in the value of an original plot occasioned by any 
contravention of the provisions of sub-section (/) or of any condition imposed 
under sub-section (2) shall, notwithstanding anything contained in sections 101, 
102 and 103, be taken into account in fixing the market value of such plot. 


(9) No person shall be entitled to compensation in respect of any damage, 
loss or injury resulting from any action taken by the Planning and Development 
Authority under sub-section (/) of section 92 except in respect of a building or 
work begun or contract entered into before the publication of the draft town 
planning scheme by the Planning and Development Authority under section 62: 


Provided that where any person is entitled to any compensation in respect of 
any building or work under this sub-section, he shall be so entitled only in so far as 
such building or work has proceeded at the time of the publication of the draft 
town planning scheme by the Planning and Development Authority under 
section 62, subject to the conditions of agreement, if any, entered into between 
such person and the Planning and Development Authority. 


(10) On and after the date referred to in sub-section (/), the Planning and 
Development Authority intending to carry out development of land, within the 
area included in the draft town planning scheme, for its own purpose in exercise of 
its powers under any law for the time being in force, shall carry out such 
development in conformity with the provisions of such scheme, and of the 
bye-laws and regulations relating to construction of buildings. 


(11) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any operational 
construction undertaken by the Central Government or the Government. 


71. (J) Within one month from the date on which the sanction of the 
Government to a draft town planning scheme is notified, the Government shall 
appoint a Town Planning Officer possessing such qualification, as may be 
prescribed, for the purpose of such scheme and provide him with such number of 
officers and staff as may be considered necessary: 


Provided that the Government may, on the request made by the Planning and 
Development Authority, appoint a Town Planning Officer within one month from 
the date of publication of the draft town planning scheme by the Planning and 
Development Authority under section 62. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


(2) The Government may, if it thinks fit, at any time, remove, on the ground 
of incompetence or misconduct or any other good and sufficient reason, a Town 
Planning Officer appointed under this section and shall forthwith appoint another 
person in his place and any proceeding pending before the Town Planning Officer 
immediately before the date of his removal shall be continued and disposed of by 
the new Town Planning Officer appointed in his place: 


Provided that no Town Planning Officer shall be removed under this 
sub-section except after an inquiry in which he shall be informed of the charges 
against him and a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges is given to him. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), a Town Planning Officer 
appointed under sub-section (/) for the purpose of any town planning scheme shall 
cease to hold office with effect from the date on which the final town planning 
scheme is sanctioned under section 86. 


72. The Town Planning Officer shall, within a period of twelve months from 
the date of his appointment, after following such procedure as may be prescribed, 
sub-divide the town planning scheme into a preliminary scheme and a final 
scheme: 


Provided that the Government may, from time to time, by order in writing, 
extend the said period by such further period or periods, not exceeding six months 
at a time, as may be specified in the said order, and any such order may be given 
retrospective effect from the date on which the said period or the extended period, 
as the case may be, expired. 


73. (1) In a preliminary town planning scheme, the Town Planning Officer 
shall,— 


(a) after giving notice to the persons affected by such scheme in such 
manner and form, as may be prescribed, define and demarcate the areas 
allotted to, or reserved for, any public purpose, or for a purpose of the 
Planning and Development Authority and the final plots; 


(0) after giving notice referred to in clause (a), determine in a case in 
which a final plot is to be allotted to persons in ownership in common, the 
respective shares of such persons; 


(c) provide for the total or partial transfer of any right in an original 
plot to a final plot or provide for the transfer of any right in an original plot 
in accordance with the provisions of section 104; and 


(d) determine the period within which the works provided in such 
scheme shall be completed by the Planning and Development Authority. 


(2) The Town Planning Officer shall submit the preliminary scheme so 
prepared to the Government for sanction and shall, after sanction by the 
Government, prepare and submit to the Government the final scheme in 
accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3) for sanction. 


(3) In the final town planning scheme, the Town Planning Officer shall— 


(a) fix the difference between the total of the values of the original plots 
and the total of the values of the plots included in the final scheme in accordance 
with the provisions of clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 100; 


(6) determine whether the areas used, allotted or reserved for a public 
purpose or purposes of the Planning and Development Authority are 
beneficial wholly or partly to the owners or residents within the area of the 
final scheme; 


Duties of Town 
Planning 
Officer. 


Contents of 
preliminary and 
final town 
planning 
schemes. 


Certain 
decisions of 
Town Planning 
Officer to be 
enforceable. 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(c) estimate the portion of the sums payable as compensation on each 
plot used, allotted or reserved for a public purpose or for the purpose of the 
Planning and Development Authority which is beneficial partly to the 
owners or residents within the area of the final scheme and partly to the 
general public, which shall be included in the costs of such scheme; 


(d) calculate the contribution to be levied under sub-section (/) of 
section 102, on each plot used, allotted or reserved for a public purpose or 
for the purpose of the Planning and Development Authority which is 
beneficial partly to the owners or residents within the area of the final 
scheme and partly to the general public; 


(e) determine the amount of exemption, if any, from the payment of 
contribution that may be granted in respect of plots exclusively occupied for 
religious or charitable purposes; 


(f) estimate the increment to accrue in respect of each plot included in 
the final scheme in accordance with the provisions of section 101; 


(g) calculate the proportion of the contribution to be levied on each plot 
in the final scheme to the increment estimated to accrue in respect of such 
plot under sub-section (/) of section 102; 


(A) calculate the contribution to be levied on each plot included in the 
final scheme; 


(i) determine the amount to be deducted from, or added to, as the case 
may be, the contribution leviable from a person in accordance with the 
provisions of section 103; 


(j) estimate with reference to claims made before him, after notice has 
been given by him in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, and the 
compensation to be paid to the owner, whose property or right is injuriously 
affected by the making of the town planning scheme in accordance with the 
provisions of section 105; and 


(k) draw in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, the 
preliminary and the final town planning schemes, in accordance with the 
draft town planning scheme: 


Provided that the Town Planning Officer may make variation from the draft 
town planning scheme, but no such variation, if it is of a substantial nature, shall 
be made except with the previous sanction of the Government, and except after 
hearing the appropriate authority and any owners who may raise objections in 
respect of such variation. 


Explanation |.—For the purpose of this proviso “variation of a substantial 
nature” means a variation which is estimated by the Town Planning Officer to 
involve an increase of ten per cent. in the costs of the scheme as is described in 
section 100, on account of the provisions of new works or the allotment of 
additional sites for public purposes included in the preliminary scheme drawn up 
by the Town Planning Officer. 


Explanation 2—Where there is any difference of opinion between the Town 
Planning Officer and the Planning and Development Authority as to whether a 
variation made by the Town Planning Officer is of substantial nature or not, the 
matter shall be referred by the Planning and Development Authority to the 
Government for its decision, which shall be conclusive and enforceable. 


74. Except in matters arising out of clauses (2), (d), (f), (g), (A) and (/) of 
sub-section (3) of section 73, every decision of the Town Planning Officer shall be 
conclusive and binding on all persons. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


75. Any decision of the Town Planning Officer under clauses (८), (d), (), (8), 
(A) and (/) of sub-section (3) of section 73 shall forthwith be communicated to the 
party concermmed in such form, as may be prescribed and any party aggrieved by 
such decision may within one month from the date of receipt of such decision, 
prefer an appeal to the Board of Appeal constituted under section 76. 


76. (1) The Government shall, from time to time, by notification, constitute a 
Board of Appeal for hearing and deciding appeals under section 75. 


(2) The Board of Appeal shall consist of three Members, one of whom shall 
be its President and two Members, who shall be assessors possessing such 
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The President shall be a person who is or has been a District Judge. 


(4) The terms of appointment of the President of the Board of Appeal and 
conditions of service shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Board of Appeal constituted under sub-section (/) shall stand 
dissolved as soon as a copy of its decision in appeal is sent to the Town Planning 
Officer under sub-section (2) of section 83. 


(6) The Government may, if it thinks fit, remove for incompetence or 
misconduct or for any other good or sufficient reason, any assessor appointed as a 
Member under sub-section (2). 


(7) If any Member is removed, or dies, or refuses, or neglects to act, or 
becomes incapable of acting, the concerned authority who appointed such assessor 
shall appoint forthwith an assessor in his place. 


77. (1) The Town Planning Officer shall be present at the proceedings before 
the Board of Appeal. 


(2) The Town Planning Officer shall not be required to give evidence in such 
proceedings but the President may require him to assist the Board of Appeal in an 
advisory capacity. 


(3) When the Town Planning Officer is required under sub-section (2) to assist 
the Board of Appeal, and if he is not a salaried officer of the Government, he shall be 
entitled to such fees as the Government may, from time to time, determine. 


78. The Board of Appeal may sit either at the headquarters of the President 
or at any other place within the local limits of his jurisdiction which he may deem 
convenient for the consideration and decision of any matter before it. 


79. All questions of law and procedure shall be decided by the President of 
the Board of Appeal and all other questions shall be decided by the President and 
its two Members or by a majority of them. 


80. (7) After making such inquiry as it may think fit, the Board of Appeal 
may either direct the Town Planning Officer to reconsider its proposals, or accept, 
modify, vary or reject the proposals of the Town Planning Officer. 


(2) Every decision of the Board of Appeal shall be conclusive and binding on 
all persons. 


81. Nothing contained in this Regulation shall be deemed to constitute the 
Board of Appeal to be a Court. 


82. (1) The Members of the Board of Appeal, who are assessors and not 
salaried officers of the Government, shall be entitled to such remuneration either 
by way of monthly salary or by way of fees or partly by way of salary and partly 
by way of fees, as the Government may, from time to time, determine. 


Appeal against 
decision of 
Town Planning 
Officer. 


Board of 
Appeal. 


Town Planning 
Officer to assist 
Board in 
advisory 
capacity and his 
remuneration. 


Place where 
Board of Appeal 
may sit. 


Decision of 
questions of law 
and other 
questions. 


Powers of Board 
of Appeal to 
decide matter. 


Board of Appeal 
not to be Court. 


Remuneration of 
assessors and 
payment of 
incidental expenses 
of Board of Appeal 
to be added to 
costs of town 
planning scheme. 


Decision of 
Town Planning 
Officer to be 
conclusive in 
certain matters 
and variation of 
scheme in view 
of decision in 
appeal. 


Power of Town 
Planning Officer 
to split up draft 
town planning 
scheme into 
separate 
sections. 


Submission of 
preliminary and 
final town 
planning schemes 
to Government. 


Power of 
Government to 
sanction or 
refuse to 
sanction scheme 
and effect of 
sanction. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(2) The salary of the President of the Board of Appeal or its Member, who is 
an assessor, who is a salaried Government officer and any remuneration payable 
under sub-section (/) and the fees payable to a Town Planning Officer under 
sub-section (3) of section 77 and all expenses incidental to the working of the 
Board of Appeal shall, unless the Government otherwise determines, be defrayed 
out of the funds of the Planning and Development Authority and shall be added to 
the costs of the town planning scheme. 


83. (1) Where no appeal has been preferred under section 75 in respect of a 
matter arising out of clause (2), clause (d), clause (f), clause (g), clause (४) or 
clause (j) of sub-section (3) of section 73, the decision of the Town Planning 
Officer shall be conclusive and binding on the parties. 


(2) The Board of Appeal shall send a copy of its decision in appeal to the 
Town Planning Officer, who shall, if necessary, make any variation in the town 
planning scheme in accordance with such decision and shall forward the final 
town planning scheme together with a copy of his decision under section 74 and a 
copy of the decision of the Board of Appeal in appeal to the Government for the 
sanction of the final town planning scheme. 


84. (/) After a Town Planning Officer has been appointed under section 71, 
the Planning and Development Authority may apply to him to split up the draft 
town planning scheme into different sections and to deal with each section 
separately as if such section were a separate draft town planning scheme. 


(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (/), the Town Planning 
Officer may, after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, split up the draft town 
planning scheme into sections. 


(3) The provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder shall, so 
far as may be, apply to each of such sections as it were a separate draft town 
planning scheme. 


85. The Town Planning Officer shall submit the preliminary town planning 
scheme to the Government for sanction before the final town planning scheme is 
submitted to the Government under sub-section (2) of section 73, together with a 
copy of his decision under section 74. 


86. (7) On receipt of the preliminary town planning scheme or, as the case 
may be, the final town planning scheme, the Government may— 


(a) in the case of preliminary town planning scheme, within a period of 
two months from the date of its receipt; and 


(5) in the case of a final town planning scheme, within a period of three 
months from the date of its receipt, 


by notification, sanction the preliminary town planning scheme or the final town 
planning scheme or refuse to give sanction, provided that in sanctioning any such 
scheme, the Government may make such modifications as may, in its opinion, be 
necessary for the purpose of correcting an error, irregularity or informality. 


(2) Where the Government sanctions the preliminary town planning scheme 
or the final town planning scheme, it shall state in the notification— 


(a) the place at which the said scheme shall be kept open for inspection 
by the public; and 


(0) a date on which all the liabilities created by the said scheme shall 
come into force: 


Provided that the Government may, from time to time, extend such date, by 
notification, by such period, not exceeding three months at a time, as it thinks fit. 


Sec. 1] 


(3) On and after the date fixed in such notification, the preliminary town 
planning scheme or the final town planning scheme, as the case may be, shall have 
effect as if it were promulgated under this Regulation. 


(4) The Planning and Development Authority shall, after the preliminary 
town planning scheme is sanctioned by the Government under sub-section (J), 
complete the execution of such scheme within a period of two years from the date 
of the sanction of that scheme, failing which the Government may take such action 
against Planning and Development Authority as it deems fit. 


87. (1) If at any time before the preliminary town planning scheme is 
forwarded by the Town Planning Officer to the Government, a representation is 
made to the Town Planning Officer by the Planning and Development Authority 
and a majority of the owners in the area, that the said scheme be withdrawn, the 
Town Planning Officer shall, after inviting objections to such representation from 
all persons interested in the said scheme, forward such representation together 
with the objections, if any, to the Government. 


(2) The Government, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit, may, if it 
is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, by notification, direct 
that the preliminary town planning scheme shall be withdrawn and upon such 
withdrawal no further proceeding shall be taken in regard to such scheme. 


88. On and after the day on which the preliminary scheme comes into force— 


(a) all lands required by the Planning and Development Authority 
shall, unless it is otherwise determined in such scheme, vest absolutely in the 
Planning and Development Authority free from all encumbrances; 


(6) all rights in the original plots which have been re-constituted into 
final plots shall determine and the final plots shall become subject to the 
rights settled by the Town Planning Officer. 


89. (7) Where the final plot is allotted in joint ownership in the sanctioned 
preliminary town planning scheme or final town planning scheme, then on an 
application being made to the committee by any of the joint owners, the committee 
constituted under sub-section (2) shall give a notice to all the concerned and after 
giving them an opportunity of being heard, shall, with respect to such final plot, 
define the share of the joint holders and demarcate the area that may be allotted to 
each of them. 


(2) The committee referred to in sub-section (/) shall consist of the 
following members, namely:— 


(a) the Secretary, Urban Development—Chairperson, ex officio; 
(6) the Chief Town Planner—Member Secretary, ex officio; and 
(c) any other Member, appointed by the chairperson. 


(3) The decision of the committee in defining the share of the joint holders 
and demarcating the area that may be allotted to each of them shall be deemed to 
be the part of the town planning scheme sanctioned under section 86. 


90. On and after the date on which a preliminary town planning scheme 
comes into force, any person continuing to occupy any land which he is not 
entitled to occupy under the preliminary scheme shall, in accordance with such 
procedure, as may be prescribed, be summarily evicted by the Planning and 
Development Authority. 


91. (7) On and after the date on which the preliminary town planning scheme 
comes into force, the Planning and Development Authority shall, after giving such 
notice, as may be prescribed, and in accordance with the provisions of such 
scheme,— 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 


Withdrawal of 
town planning 
scheme. 


Effect of 
preliminary 
town planning 
scheme. 


Manner of 
resolution of 
grievances after 
sanctioning 
preliminary or 
final town 
planning 
scheme. 


Power of 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority to 
evict summarily. 


Power to enforce 
town planning 
scheme. 


Power to vary 
town planning 
scheme on 
ground of error, 
irregularity or 
informality. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(a) remove, pull down, or alter any building or other work in the area 
included in the said scheme, which contravenes the scheme, or in the 
erection of which or carrying out any of the provisions of the scheme has not 
been complied with; or 


(b) execute any work, even if it is the duty of any person to execute 
under the said scheme, and if it appears to the Planning and Development 
Authority that the delay in the execution of such work would prejudice the 
efficient operation of the scheme. 


(2) Any expenses incurred by the Planning and Development Authority 
under this section shall be recovered from the person in default or from the owner 
of the plot in the manner provided for the recovery of sums due to the Planning 
and Development Authority under the provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) If any question arises as to whether any building or work contravenes a 
town planning scheme or whether any provision of a town planning scheme is not 
complied with in the erection or carrying out of any such building or work, it shall 
be referred to the Government and the decision of the Government shall be final 
and binding on all persons. 


(4) No person shall be entitled to compensation in respect of any damage, 
loss or injury resulting from any action taken by the Planning and Development 
Authority under the provisions of this section except in respect of the building or 
work begun before the date referred to in sub-section (/) and only in so far as such 
building or work has proceeded until that date: 


Provided that any claim to compensation, which is not barred by this 
sub-section shall be subject to the condition of any agreement entered into 
between the claimant and the Planning and Development Authority. 


(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any operational 
construction undertaken by the Central Government or the Government. 


92. (1) If after the preliminary town planning scheme or the final town 
planning scheme has come into force, the Planning and Development Authority 
considers that the scheme is defective on account of an error, irregularity or 
informality, the Planning and Development Authority may apply in writing to the 
Government for the variation of such scheme. 


(2) If, on receiving such application or otherwise, the Government is 
satisfied that the variation required is not substantial, the Government shall publish 
a draft of such variation in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The draft variation published under sub-section (2) shall state that every 
variation proposed to be made in the preliminary town planning scheme or the 
final town planning scheme and if any such variation relates to a matter specified 
in any of the clauses (a) to (A) of sub-section (4) of section 60, the draft variation 
shall also contain such other particulars, as may be prescribed. 


(4) The draft variation shall be open to the inspection of the public at the 
head office of the appropriate authority during office hours. 


(5) Within one month from the date of publication of the draft variation 
under sub-section (2), any person affected thereby may communicate in writing 
his objections to such variation to the Government through the Collector and send 
a copy thereof to the Planning and Development Authority. 


(6) After receiving the objections under sub-section (5), the Government 
may, after consulting the Planning and Development Authority and after making 
such inquiry as it may think fit, by notification,— 


Sec. 1] 


(a) appoint a Town Planning Officer and thereupon the provisions of 
this Chapter shall, so far as may be, apply to such draft variation as if it were 
a draft town planning scheme sanctioned by the Government; or 


(b) make the variation with or without modification; or 
(c) refuse to make the variation. 


(7) From the date of the notification making the variation, with or without 
modification, such variation shall take effect as it were incorporated in the 
preliminary town planning scheme or the final town planning scheme. 


93. If at any time after the final town planning scheme comes into force, the 
Planning and Development Authority is of the opinion that the purpose for which 
any land is allotted in such scheme under item (B) or (C) of sub-clause (i) of 
clause (A) of sub-section (4) of section 60 requires to be changed to any other 
purpose specified in any of the said items, the Planning and Development 
Authority may make such change after following the procedure specified in 
section 95. 


94. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 92, a town planning 
scheme may at any time be varied by a subsequent town planning scheme made, 
published and sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation. 


95. (1) For any change of purpose required in the final town planning 
scheme under section 93, the Planning and Development Authority may publish 
the requisite draft amendments in such manner, as may be prescribed, and invite 
suggestions or objections thereto from any person. 


(2) If any person communicates in writing any suggestions or objections 
relating to the draft amendments, to the Planning and Development Authority 
within one month from the date of publication of such draft amendments under 
sub-section (/), the Planning and Development Authority shall consider such 
suggestions or objections and may, at any time before submitting the draft 
amendments to the Government as hereinafter provided, carry out such 
amendments in the final town planning scheme as it thinks fit. 


(3) The Planning and Development Authority shall, within a period of two 
months from the date of its publication, submit the draft amendments along with 
the suggestions or objections and the amendments made thereto in the final town 
planning scheme to the Government for its sanction. 


(4) On receipt of the draft amendment along with the particulars referred to 
in sub-section (3), the Government may, after making such inquiry as it may think 
fit, sanction the amendment submitted with or without modifications as it deems 
necessary or refuse to sanction the amendment. 


(5) If the amendment is sanctioned by the Government, the final town 
planning scheme, shall be deemed to have been varied in accordance with such 
amendments. 


96. Where a final town planning scheme, at any time after the date on which 
it comes into force, is varied, any person who has incurred any expenditure for the 
purpose of complying with such scheme shall be entitled to be compensated by the 
Planning and Development Authority for the expenditure, if such expenditure is 
rendered abortive by reason of the variation of such scheme. 


97. In the event of a town planning scheme being withdrawn or the sanction 
to a preliminary scheme is refused by the Government, the Government may direct 
that the costs of such scheme shall be borne by the Planning and Development 
Authority or be paid to the Planning and Development Authority by the owners 
concermed in such proportion as the Government may, in each case, determine. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


Variation of 
town planning 
scheme for land 
allotted for 
public purpose. 


Variation of 
town planning 
scheme by 
another scheme. 


Procedure for 
variation under 
section 93. 


Compensation 
when final town 
planning scheme 
is varied. 


Apportionment 
of costs of 
scheme 
withdrawn or not 
sanctioned. 


Right to appear 
by recognised 
agent. 


Powers of Civil 
Courts in respect 
of certain 
matters. 


Costs of town 
planning 
scheme. 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


98. Every party to any proceeding before the Town Planning Officer or the 


Board of Appeal shall be entitled to appear either in person or by his recognised agent. 


99. For the purposes of this Regulation, an officer appointed under 


sub-section (/) of section 66 or the Town Planning Officer or the Board of Appeal 
shall have the same powers of a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(6) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 


(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents. 


100. (7) The costs of a town planning scheme shall include— 


(a) all sums payable by the Planning and Development Authority under 
the provisions of this Regulation, which are not specifically excluded from 
the costs of the scheme; 


(6) all sums spent or estimated to be spent by the Planning and 
Development Authority in the making and in the execution of the scheme: 


Provided that the estimates shall be with reference to the period during 
which the preliminary town planning scheme is to be implemented after it is 
sanctioned under section 86; 


(c) all sums payable as compensation for the land reserved or 
designated for a public purpose or purposes of the Planning and 
Development Authority, which is solely beneficial to the owners of the land 
or residents within the area of the scheme; 


(d) such portion of the sums payable as compensation for the land 
reserved or designated for any public purpose or for the purposes of the 
Planning and Development Authority, which is beneficial, partly to the 
owners or residents within the area of the scheme and partly to the general 
public, as is attributable to the benefit accruing to the owners of land or 
residents within the area of the scheme from such reservation or designation; 


(e) all legal expenses incurred by the Planning and Development 
Authority in the making and in the execution of the scheme; 


(f) any amount by which the total of the values of the original plots 
exceeds the total amount of the values of the plots included in the final town 
planning scheme, each of such plots being estimated at its market value at 
the date of the publication of draft town planning scheme by Planning and 
Development Authority under section 62, with all the buildings and works 
thereon on that date and without reference to improvements contemplated in 
the scheme, other than improvements due to alteration of its boundaries; and 


(g) twenty per cent. of the amount of the cost of infrastructure provided 
in the area adjacent to the area of the scheme as is necessary for the purpose 
of and incidental to the scheme. 


(2) If, in any case, the total of the values of the plots included in the final 


town planning scheme exceeds the total of values of the original plots, each of 
such plots being estimated in the manner provided in clause (f) of sub-section (/), 
then the amount of such excess shall be deducted in arriving at the costs of the 
scheme, as specified in sub-section (/). 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


101. For the purposes of this Regulation, “increment” means the amount by 
which the market value of a plot included in a final town planning scheme, as 
estimated on the date of publication of the draft town planning scheme under 
section 62 on the assumption that the scheme has been completed, exceeds the 
market value of the same plot on that date estimated without taking into account 
the improvements contemplated under the scheme: 


Provided that in estimating such values, the value of buildings or other works 
erected or in the course of erection on such plot shall not be taken into 
consideration. 


102. (/) The costs of a town planning scheme shall be met wholly or in part 
by contributions to be levied by the Planning and Development Authority on each 
plot included in the final town planning scheme calculated in proportion to the 
increment which is estimated to accrue in respect of such plot by the Town 
Planning Officer: 


Provided that— 


(a)(i) where the cost of such scheme does not exceed half the 
increment, the cost shall be met wholly by a contribution; and 


(ii) where it exceeds half the increment, to the extent of half the 
increment it shall be met by a contribution and the excess shall be borne by 
the appropriate authority; 


(6) where a plot is subject to a mortgage with possession or to a lease, 
the Planning and Development Authority shall determine in what proportion 
the mortgagee or lessee on the one hand and the mortgagor or lessor on the 
other, shall pay such contribution; 


(c) no such contribution shall be levied on a plot used, allotted or 
reserved for a public purpose or purposes of the Planning and Development 
Authority which is solely for the benefit of the owners of plots, or residents 
within the area of such scheme; and 


(d) the contribution levied on a plot used, allotted or reserved for a 
public purpose, or purposes of the Planning and Development Authority, 
which is beneficial, partly to the owners or residents within the area of the 
scheme and partly to the general public, shall be calculated in proportion to 
the benefit estimated to accrue to the general public from such use, allotment 
or reservation. 


(2) The owner of each plot included in the final town planning scheme shall be 
primarily liable for the payment of the contribution leviable in respect of such plot. 


103. The amount by which the total value of the plots included in the final 
town planning scheme, with all the buildings and works thereon allotted to any 
person, falls short of, or exceeds, the total value of the original plots with all the 
buildings and works thereon of such person, shall, as the case may be, be deducted 
from or added to the contribution leviable from such person, by estimating each of 
such plots at its market value on the date of the publication of draft town planning 
scheme by the Planning and Development Authority under section 62 and without 
reference to the improvements contemplated in such scheme other than the 
improvements due to the alteration of its boundaries. 


104. Any right in an original plot, which in the opinion of the Town Planning 
Officer is capable of being transferred wholly or in part, without prejudice to the 
making of a town planning scheme, to a final plot, shall be so transferred and any 
right in an original plot, which in the opinion of the Town Planning Officer is not 
capable of being so transferred shall be extinguished: 


Calculation of 
increment. 


Contribution 
towards costs of 
town planning 
scheme. 


Certain amount 
to be added or 
deducted from 
contribution 
leviable from a 
person. 


Transfer of right 
from original to 
final plot or 
extinction of 
such right. 


Compensation in 
respect of 
property or right 
injuriously 
affected by 
scheme. 


Exclusion of 
compensation in 
certain cases. 


Provision for 
cases in which 
amount payable 
to owner 
exceeds amount 
due from him. 


Provisions for 
cases in which 
value of 
developed plots 
is less than 
amount payable 
by owner. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Provided that an agricultural lease shall not be transferred from an original 
plot to a reconstituted plot without the consent of all the parties to such lease. 


105. The owner, whose property or right is injuriously affected by the 
making of a town planning scheme shall, if he makes a claim before the Town 
Planning Officer within such time, as may be prescribed, be entitled to be 
compensated in respect thereof by the Planning and Development Authority or by 
any person benefited, or partly by the Planning and Development Authority and 
partly by such person as the Town Planning Officer may in each case determine: 


Provided that the value of such property or rights shall be deemed to be its 
market value on the date of publication of the draft town planning scheme by the 
Planning and Development Authority under section 62 without reference to the 
improvements contemplated in such scheme. 


106. (7) Where compensation is payable in respect of any property or private 
right under any other law for the time being in force applicable to the area for 
which the town planning scheme is made, such property or private right which is 
alleged to be injuriously affected by reason of any provisions contained in the 
town planning scheme shall not be eligible for compensation under this 
Regulation. 


(2) Any property or private right shall not be deemed to be injuriously 
affected under this section by reason merely of any provision included in a town 
planning scheme, which, for the purpose of providing amenities in the area 
included in such scheme or part thereof, imposes any conditions and restrictions in 
regard to any of the matters specified in clause (/) of sub-section (4) of section 60. 


107. If the owner of an original plot is not provided with a plot in the 
preliminary town planning scheme, or if the contribution to be levied from him 
under section 102 is less than the total amount to be deducted therefrom under any 
of the provisions of this Regulation, the net amount of his loss shall be payable to 
him by the Planning and Development Authority in such manner as may be agreed 
upon by the parties. 


108. (1) Where, for any reason the total amount which would be due to the 
Planning and Development Authority under the provisions of this Regulation from 
the owner of a plot to be included in the final town planning scheme exceeds the 
value of such plot, estimated on the assumption that the said scheme has been 
completed, the Town Planning Officer shall at the request of the Planning and 
Development Authority direct the owner of such plot to make payment of such 
excess amount to the Planning and Development Authority. 


(2) If the owner of the plot referred to in sub-section (/) fails to make 
payment within such period, as may be prescribed, the Town Planning Officer 
shall, if the Planning and Development Authority so requests, acquire the original 
plot of such defaulter and apportion the compensation among the owner and other 
persons interested in the plot, on payment by the Planning and Development 
Authority of the value of such plot estimated at its market value on the date of 
publication of draft town planning scheme by the Planning and Development 
Authority under section 62 and without reference to the improvements 
contemplated in the said scheme; and thereupon the plot included in the final 
town planning scheme shall vest absolutely in the Planning and Development 
Authority free from all encumbrances but subject to the provisions of this 
Regulation: 


Provided that the payment made by the Planning and Development Authority 
on account of the value of the original plot shall not be included in the costs of the 
said scheme. 


2 of 1934. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


109. All payments due to be made to any person by the Planning and 
Development Authority under this Regulation, shall, as far as possible, be made by 
adjustment in the account of such person with the Planning and Development 
Authority in respect of the plot concerned or of any other plot in which he has an 
interest and failing such adjustment, shall be paid in such manner as may be 
agreed upon by the parties. 


110. () The net amount payable under the provisions of this Regulation by 
the owner of a plot included in the final town planning scheme may, at the option 
of the contributor, be paid in lump-sum or in annual instalments not exceeding ten. 


(2) If the owner elects to pay the amount by instalments, interest at such rate 
as is arrived at by adding two per cent. to the bank rate published under section 49 
of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, from time to time, shall be charged per 
annum on the net amount payable. 


(3) If the owner of a plot fails to exercise the option on or before the date 
specified in a notice issued to him in that behalf by the Planning and Development 
Authority, he shall be deemed to have exercised the option of paying contribution 
in instalments and the interest on the contribution shall be calculated from the date 
specified in the notice, being the date before which he was required to exercise the 
option. 


(4) Where two or more plots included in the final town planning scheme are 
of the same ownership, the net amount payable by such owner under the 
provisions of this Regulation shall be distributed over his several plots in 
proportion to the increments which is estimated to accrue in respect of each plot, 
unless the owner and the Planning and Development Authority agree to a different 
method of distribution. 


111. (J) The Planning and Development Authority shall be competent to 
make any agreement with any person in respect of any matter which is to be 
provided for in a town planning scheme, subject to the power of the Government 
to modify or disallow such agreement and unless it is otherwise expressly 
provided therein, such agreement shall take effect on and after the day on which 
the town planning scheme comes into force. 


(2) The agreement referred to in sub-section (/) shall not in any way affect 
the duties of the Town Planning Officer as described in section 73 or the rights of 
third parties but it shall be binding on the parties to the agreement notwithstanding 
any decision that may be passed by the Town Planning Officer: 


Provided that if the agreement is modified by the Government, either party 
shall have the option of avoiding it, if it so elects. 


112. (7) Any sum due to the Planning and Development Authority under this 
Regulation or any rule made thereunder shall be a first charge on the plot on which 
it is due, subject to the prior payment of land revenue, if any, due to the 
Government thereon. 


(2) Any sum due to the Planning and Development Authority under this 
Regulation or any rule made thereunder which is not paid on demand on the day 
on which it becomes due, or on the day fixed by the Planning and Development 
Authority, shall be recoverable by the said Authority by distress and sale of the 
goods and chattel of the defaulter, as if the amount thereof were a property tax due 
by the said defaulter: 


Provided that in lieu of the recovery of the dues of the Planning and 
Development Authority, the sum due or the balance of any sum due, as the case 
may be, by a defaulter referred to in sub-section (2), may be recovered from him 
by filing a suit in any Civil Court of competent jurisdiction. 


Payment by 
adjustment of 
accounts. 


Payment of net 
amount due to 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


Power of 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority to 
make 
agreements. 


Recovery of 
arrears. 


Power to borrow 
money for 
making or 
execution of 
Master Plan or 
town planning 
scheme. 


Preparation, 
sanction, etc., of 
local area plan. 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


113. (7) A Planning and Development Authority may borrow money at such 
rate of interest and for such period and upon such terms, as the Government may 
approve, subject to the applicable financial rules, instructions and guidelines of the 
Government of India for the purpose of making or execution of a Master Plan or a 
town planning scheme. 


(2) Any expense incurred by a Planning and Development Authority or the 
Government under this Regulation in connection with the making and execution of 
a Master Plan or a town planning scheme shall be defrayed out of the funds of the 
Planning and Development Authority. 


CHAPTER IX 
SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR LOCAL AREA PLAN 


114. (Z) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation or any other law for the 
time being in force, the Planning and Development Authority may, having regard 
to the proposals in the final Master Plan, if any, make one or more local area plan 
for the planning area or any part thereof. 


(2) The local area plans may be made in respect of any land, whether or not 
it forms part of the sanctioned preliminary town planning scheme: 


Provided that before making the local area plan, the Planning and 
Development Authority shall notify, the boundaries of area for which such local 
area plan is to be made and publish the same in the local newspapers: 


Provided further that for making the local area plan in respect of any land 
which is not a part of the sanctioned preliminary town planning scheme, the prior 
permission of the Government shall be necessary. 


(3) The local area plan may make provisions for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) define and provide for the complete road and street pattern for the 
present and in the future and indicate the traffic circulation; or 


(6) lay down in detail the projected road and street furniture; or 


(c) access, make projection for the future requirements of amenities, 
services and utilities, such as, transport, electricity, water, drainage, 
plantation and landscape; or 


(d) specify in detail the footprint, height and building envelope, control 
over architectural features including elevation and frontage, number of 
stories, size of buildings, courtyard, pickup and drop off points, parking and 
such other requirements to integrate the building envelope in the vicinity; or 


(e) indicate the phasing of the program of development, the cost of 
development, and the share to be paid by each owner or the beneficiary; or 


(f) access the cost of works to be provided by the Planning and 
Development Authority and the contribution of fees to be paid by different 
owners; or 


(g) make such provisions as are necessary which are enumerated in 
clause (/) of sub-section (4) of section 60, 


and indicate in the plan and other document, the land which shall vest with the 
Planning and Development Authority. 


(4) The Planning and Development Authority shall, after making the draft 
local area plan,— 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


(a) for the purpose of finalising it, call a meeting or meetings of the 
persons affected by such local area plan, by a public notice and notices to the 
individuals whose addresses are known, and explain the contents of the local 
area plan for inviting their objections and suggestions on the same; 


(6) consider the objections and suggestions received under clause (a), 
and modify the said plan as it thinks fit and publish it in the Official Gazette, 
inviting objections and suggestions from the person affected by the local area 
plan within a period of thirty days. 


(5) The appropriate authority may consider the objections and suggestions 
received under clause (8) of sub-section (4) and modify the plan, if necessary, and 
submit the same to the Government along with the objections and suggestions, and 
its conclusion thereon. 


(6) On receipt of the draft local area plan under sub-section (5), the 
Government may, by notification,— 


(a) sanction such local area plan with or without modifications or 
subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose; or 


(6) return the plan to the Planning and Development Authority with 
directions as it may think fit; or 


(c) refuse to accord sanction. 


(7) Where the Government sanctions the local area plan under clause (a) of 
sub-section (6), it shall state in the notification— 


(a) the place at which the said local area plan shall be kept open for 
inspection by the public; and 


(6) a date on which all the liabilities created by the local area plan shall 
come into force: 


Provided that the Government may, from time to time, extend such period, 
by notification, not exceeding three months at a time, as it thinks fit. 


(8) On and after the date on which a local area plan comes into force, any 
person continuing to occupy any land, which he is not entitled to occupy as per the 
local area plan, shall, within a period of three months, surrender the land to the 
Planning and Development Authority and if he fails to do so the Planning and 
Development Authority shall, give a notice in writing to evict the person from 
such land within a period specified in the notice: 


Provided that if such person continues to occupy such land for which the said 
notice has been issued, the Planning and Development Authority shall take the 
following measures, namely:— 


(a) remove, pull down, any building construction or any other work done 
in such land which contravenes the local area plan or where any erection or 
carrying out has not complied with any provision of the local area plan; 


(0) any expenses incurred by the appropriate authority under this 
section shall be recovered from the person in default or the owner of the plot 
in such manner as provided for the recovery of the sums due to the 
appropriate authority under the provisions of this Regulation; 


(c) no person shall be entitled to compensation in respect of any 
damage, loss or injury resulting from any action taken by the Appropriate 
Authority under the provisions of this section except in respect of the 
building or work begun before the date referred to in clause (0) of 
sub-section (7) and only in so far as such building or work has proceeded 
until that date: 


Levy of 
development 
charge. 


Levy of 
processing fee 
for change of 
zone. 


Assessment of 
development 
charge. 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Provided that any claim to the compensation which is not barred under this 
sub-section shall be subject to the condition of any agreement entered between the 
claimant and the appropriate authority. 


CHAPTER X 
LEVY, ASSESSMENT AND RECOVERY OF DEVELOPMENT CHARGE 


115. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made 
thereunder, and with the previous sanction of the Government, every Planning and 
Development Authority shall, by a notification, levy a development charge for 
carrying out any development or change to the use of land for which permission is 
required to be obtained under Chapter VII, in whole or any part of the planning 
area, at the rates specified from time to time: 


Provided that different rates may be specified for different parts of the 
planning area. 


(2) The development charge shall be leviable on the person who undertakes 
or carries out any such development or change in use of land as referred to in 
sub-section (/). 


(3) The maximum and minimum development charges under this section and 
the classification based on which such charges are fixed shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) and (2), no 
development charge shall be levied in the cases of development, or any change to 
the use of any land which is vested in, or is under the control or possession of, the 
Central Government, the Government or any local authority. 


(5) The Government may provide for exemption from the levy of 
development charge on the development, or change of use of any land under this 
section, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 


116. (1) The Government may, by notification, levy a fee to be charged for 
processing of applications filed with the Board, for change of zone in notified 
Master Plans and Zoning Plans. 


(2) The Government may, by notification, levy a fee to be charged for change of 
Zone in Master Plans and Zoning Plans from the notified Zone to other Zone. 


(3) The rate of processing fee or fees for change of zone leviable under this 
section shall be such as the Government may, by notification, specify. 


117. (J) Any person, who intends to carry out any development, or to 
institute, or change the use of any land for which permission under Chapter VII is 
necessary, whether he has applied for such permission or not, or who has 
commenced the carrying out of any such development or has carried out such 
development or instituted or changed any such use, shall apply to the Planning and 
Development Authority in such manner, as may be prescribed, for assessment of 
development charge payable in respect thereof. 


(2) The Planning and Development Authority shall, on such application 
being made, or if no such application is made, after serving a notice on the person 
liable for payment of development charge, determine in the manner specified in 
sub-sections (3) and (4), the development charge, as may be leviable in respect of 
that development or use. 


(3) The Town Planning Officer shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard to the person who has made an application under sub-section (/), or 
who has been served with a notice under sub-section (2), make a report to the 
Planning and Development Authority. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 49 


(4) After taking into consideration the report of the Town Planning Officer 
made under sub-section (3), the Planning and Development Authority shall pass an 
order of assessment in writing, indicating the amount of development charge: 


Provided that— 


(a) where the permission under Chapter VII has not been granted for 
carrying out the said development, the Planning and Development Authority 
may postpone the assessment of the development charge; or 


(b) where the application relates to the carrying out of any development 
in any land, the Planning and Development Authority may refuse to assess 
the development charge payable in respect thereof, unless it is satisfied that 
the applicant has an interest in the land sufficient to enable him to carry out 
such development, or that the applicant will carry out the development 
within such period as the Planning and Development Authority considers 
appropriate; or 


(c) where the application relates to the development or change in any 
use of land, the Planning and Development Authority may refuse to assess 
the amount of development charge payable in respect thereof unless it is 
satisfied that the use will be instituted within such period as the Planning and 
Development Authority considers appropriate. 


(5) The Planning and Development Authority shall deliver or serve a copy of 
the order passed under sub-section (4) on the applicant or the person liable for 
payment of the development charge. 


(6) An order of assessment made under this section shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 118, be conclusive and enforceable. 


118. (J) Any person aggrieved by an order of assessment made under 
section 117 may, within such time and in such manner, as may be prescribed, 
appeal to the Board. 


(2) On an appeal made to the Board under sub-section (/), the Chief Town 
Planner (Administration) shall, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard to the appellant and the Planning and Development Authority concerned, 
make a report to the Board. 


(3) The Board may, after taking into consideration the report of the Chief 
Town Planner (Administration), and if it deems necessary, after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the appellant and the Planning and 
Development Authority concerned, pass such order as it deems fit. 


119. (7) If any development of land is commenced or carried out or use of 
land has been changed without payment of the development charge assessed under 
the provisions of section 117, the amount of the development charge shall, subject 
to prior payment of the land revenue, if any, be a first charge upon the interest of 
the person so liable on the land on which development has been commenced or 
carried out or use of land has been changed. 


(2) The development charge under this Chapter shall be recoverable as if it 
were an arrear of land revenue. 


CHAPTER XI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


120. (J) Every Planning and Development Authority shall maintain a 
separate fund to which shall be credited— 


Appeals against 
assessment. 


Development 
charge to be 
charge on land 
and to be 
recoverable as 
arrears of land 
revenue. 


Fund of 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


Budget of 
Planning 
Authority. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(a) all moneys received by the Planning and Development Authority 
from the Government by way of grants, loans, advances or otherwise for the 
purposes of this Regulation; 


(b) all development charges or other charges received by the Planning 
and Development Authority under this Regulation or bye-laws made 
thereunder; 


(c) contributions from the local authority or authorities of the area 
included in the planning area of the Planning and Development Authority, of 
such amount, not exceeding ten per cent. of the general fund of such local 
authority or authorities, as the Government may specify from time to 
time; and 


(d) all moneys received by the Planning and Development Authority 
from any other source. 


(2) The fund referred to in sub-section (/) shall be applied towards 
meeting— 


(a) the administrative expenses of the Planning and Development 
Authority; or 


(b) the cost of acquisition of land in the planning area for the purpose 
of development; or 


(c) the expenditure for any development of land in the planning area; or 


(d) the expenditure for such other purposes as the Government may 
direct. 


(3) The Planning and Development Authority shall make separate allocation 
out of the said fund for regular training and capacity-building initiatives for its 
officers and staff, as well as, for the procurement of necessary tools and 
equipment, so as to ensure the availability of quality resources for effective 
planning and execution. 


(4) Every Planning and Development Authority may keep in its current 
account with the State Bank of India or any other Bank as may be approved by the 
Government in this behalf, such sums of money out of its funds, as may be 
prescribed, and any money in excess of the said sum shall be invested in such 
manner as may be approved by the Government. 


(5) The Government may make such grants, advances and loans to any 
Planning and Development Authority as it may deem necessary, for the 
performance of the functions under this Regulation, and all grants, loans and 
advances made shall be on such terms and conditions as the Government may 
determine. 


(6) The balances under the Planning and Development Authority shall be 
periodically reviewed by the Government, and a statement thereof may be 
submitted to the Central Government at the end of each financial year in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed. 


121. Every Planning and Development Authority shall prepare in such form 
and at such time annually, as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the 
financial year next ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Planning and Development Authority and shall forward it through the Chief Town 
Planner (Administration), to the Government and the Board, such number of 
copies thereof as may be prescribed. 


122. (/) Every Planning and Development Authority shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts 
including the balance sheet in such form as may be prescribed. 


19 of 1925. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 51 


(2) The accounts of every Planning and Development Authority shall be 
subject to audit annually by the Director of Accounts. 


(3) The Director of Accounts or any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of accounts of the Planning and Development Authority shall have 
the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit, as the 
Director of Accounts has in connection with the audit of Government accounts, 
and in particular shall have the right to demand production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of 
the Planning and Development Authority. 


(4) The accounts of every Planning and Development Authority as certified 
by the Director of Accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the Government and the Board. 


CHAPTER XII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


123. (J) The Board shall prepare for every year a report of its activities 
during the year and submit the report to the Government in such form, and on or 
before such date, as may be prescribed and the Government shall cause a copy of 
the report to be laid before the Administrator. 


(2) Every Planning and Development Authority shall prepare for every year 
a report of its activities under this Regulation during the year and submit the report 
to the Government and the Board in such form, and on or before such date, as may 
be prescribed. 


124. (1) Every Planning and Development Authority shall, for the benefit of 
its officers and other employees, constitute such pension and provident funds as it 
may deem fit, in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) Where any such pension or provident fund has been constituted, the 
Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925, 
shall apply to such fund as if it were a Government Provident Fund. 


125. (/) The Chief Town Planner, or Town Planning Officer of any Planning 
and Development Authority, or any person authorised by the Board or any 
Planning and Development Authority, may enter into, or upon, any land or 
building, with or without assistants or workmen, for the purpose of— 


(a) making any enquiry, inspection, measurement or survey or taking 
levels of such land or building; or 


(6) setting out boundaries and intended lines of works; or 


(c) marking such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks and 
cutting trenches; or 


(d) examining works under construction and ascertaining the course of 
sewers and drains; or 


(e) digging or boring into the sub-soil; or 


(f) ascertaining whether any land is being or has been developed in 
contravention of any provision of this Regulation, or the rules or regulations 
made thereunder; or 


(g) for any other purpose necessary for the efficient administration of 
this Regulation: 


Annual reports. 


Pension and 
provident funds. 


Power of entry. 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Provided that— 


(i) in the case of any building used as a dwelling house, or upon 
any enclosed part or garden attached to such building, no such entry 
shall be made without the consent of the occupier thereof by giving 
such occupier at least twenty-four hours’ notice in writing of the 
intention to enter; 


(ii) sufficient opportunity shall in every case be given to enable 
women (if any) to withdraw from such land or building; and 


(iii) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be compatible 
with the exigencies of the purpose for which the entry is made, to the 
social and religious usages of the occupants of the land or building 
entered. 


(2) The powers of the Chief Town Planner or the Board under sub-section (/) 
shall extend to the whole of the Union territory, and the powers of any Town 
Planning Officer or any Planning and Development Authority under sub-section (/) 
shall extend to the planning area within the jurisdiction of that Authority and such 
other area which the Government may have directed to be included in a Master 
Plan. 


(3) Any person who, obstructs the entry of a person empowered or 
authorised under this section to enter into or upon any land or building, or molests 
such person after such entry, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 


Keniceiat 126. (J) All documents, including notices and orders, required by this 
notices, etc. Regulation or the rules made thereunder, to be served upon any person shall, save 
as otherwise provided in any section or rule, be deemed to be duly served— 


(a) where the document is to be served on a Government department, 
local authority, statutory authority, company, corporation, society, or other 
body, if the document is addressed to the Head of the Government 
Department, Secretary or principal officer of the local authority, statutory 
authority, corporation, society or body, to the principal, branch, local or 
registered office, as the case may be, of other body and is either— 


(i) sent by registered post to such person or officer; or 
(ii) delivered at such office; 


(0) where the person to be served is a member of a partnership, if the 
document is addressed to the partnership at its principal place of business, 
identifying it by the name or style under which its business is carried on, and 
is either— 


(7) sent by registered post; or 
(ii) delivered at the said place of business; and 


(c) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the person to be 
served, and— 


(i) is given or tendered to him; or 


(ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some 
conspicuous part of his last known place of residence or business, or is 
given or tendered to some adult member of his family, or is affixed on 
some conspicuous part of the land or building to which it relates; or 


(iii) is sent by registered post to that person. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 53 


(2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served on the owner or 
occupier of any land or building, may be addressed as the owner or occupier, as the 
case may be, of that land or building (naming or describing that land or building) 
without further name or description, and shall be deemed to be duly served— 


(a) if the document so addressed is delivered or sent in accordance with 
clause (c) of sub-section (/); or 


(6) if the document so addressed or a copy thereof so addressed, is 
delivered to some person on the land or building. 


(3) Where a document is served on a partnership in accordance with this 
section, the document shall be deemed to be served on each partner. 


(4) For the purpose of enabling any documents to be served on the owner of 
any property, the Secretary to the Board, or the Board, or the Planning and 
Development Authority, or any other officer authorised by the Board or the 
Planning and Development Authority in this behalf, may by notice in writing, 
require the occupier, if any, of the property to state the name and address of the 
owner thereof. 


(5) Where the person on whom a document is to be served is a minor, the 
service upon his guardian or any adult member of his family shall be deemed to be 
service upon the minor: 


Provided that a servant of such person shall not be deemed to be a member 
of the family for the purposes of this sub-section. 


127. Every public notice given under this Regulation or the rules made Public notice 
thereunder shall be in writing over the signature of the Secretary to the Board, or 00000 मिल 


any Planning and Development Authority, or such other officer who may be as 
authorised in this behalf by the Board or Planning and Development Authority, as 

the case may be, and shall be widely made known in the locality to be affected 

thereby by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous public places within the said 

locality, or by publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in a local 
newspaper and by such other means which the Secretary to the Board or the 

Planning and Development Authority thinks fit. 

128. Where any notice, order or other document, issued or made under this Notices, etc., to 
Regulation or any rule made thereunder requires anything to be done, for the doing see temsonatle 
of which no time limit is fixed in this Regulation or such rule, notice, order or ai 
other document shall specify a reasonable time for doing the same. 

129. All permissions, orders, decisions, notices and other documents of the Authentication 
Board and any Planning and Development Authority shall be authenticated by the | 
signature of the Secretary to the Board or the Planning and Development Board and 
Authority, as the case may be, or such other officer as may be authorised by the Planning and 
Board, or such Planning and Development Authority in this behalf. peli 

130. (7) Every Regional Plan, Master Plan, or town planning scheme which Authentication 
is finally sanctioned by the Government, shall be drawn up in duplicate and every of plans and 


schemes and 


such plan or scheme or every page thereof shall be authenticated under the seal जगत thereat 


and signature of the Secretary to the Government and one such plan or scheme 
shall be deposited with the Member Secretary of the Board and sealed with his 
seal and the second shall be deposited with the Planning and Development 
Authority concerned. 


(2) The plan or scheme deposited with the Member Secretary of the Board 
under his seal shall be kept under his lock and key and custody and shall not be 
utilised unless it is required for production in any Court or any authority duly 
empowered in this behalf by the Government for verifying any entry made or 
alleged to be made in any such plan or scheme, and a certified copy of any plan or 
scheme or any part thereof may be given to any person on payment of such fee, as 
may be prescribed. 


Mode of proof 
of records of 
Board and 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


Restriction on 
summoning of 
officers and 
servants of 
Board and 
Planning and 
Development 
Authority. 


Right to appear 
by recognised 
agent. 


Power to compel 
attendance of 
witness, etc. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Contravention 
by companies. 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(3) Where a plan or scheme or any part thereof is produced for verification, 
such plan or scheme or part thereof shall, after the relevant entry or entries therein 
are duly verified (such verification being made in Court, or as the case may be, in 
the Board or any officer duly nominated by it in that behalf), be resealed with seal 
of Member Secretary of the Board and then deposited with him in the manner 
aforesaid. 


(4) If any officer or person having custody of a plan or scheme makes or 
causes to be made any change in such plan or scheme or in any part thereof, which 
is not authorised by or under the provisions of this Regulation, he shall, be liable 
to a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


131. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam, 2023, a copy of any receipt, application, plan, notice, order, entry in a 
register, or other document in the possession of the Board or any Planning and 
Development Authority, if duly certified by the authorised keeper thereof, or other 
person authorised by the Board or Planning and Development Authority in this 
behalf, shall be received as prima facie evidence of the existence of such receipt, 
application, plan, notice, order, entry or document and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case, where, and 
to the same extent as, the original receipt, application, plan, notice, order, entry or 
document would, if produced, have been admissible. 


132. No Chairperson, Member or officer or employee of the Board or any 
Planning and Development Authority shall, in any legal proceedings to which the 
Board or Planning and Development Authority is not a party, be required to 
produce any register or document, the contents of which can be proved under the 
preceding section by a certified copy, or to appear as a witness to prove the 
matters and transactions recorded therein, unless by order of the Court made for 
special cause. 


133. Every party to any proceeding before the Board, shall be entitled to 
appear either in person or by his agent authorised in writing in that behalf. 


134. For the purposes of this Regulation, an officer appointed under 
sub-section (/) of section 66 or the Board, may summon and enforce the 
attendance of witnesses including the parties interested or any of them and compel 
them to give evidence and compel the production of documents by the same 
means, and, as far as possible, in the same manner as is provided in the case of a 
Civil Court by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 


135. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, 
Planning and Development Authority or any of its officers or persons duly 
appointed or authorised by it in respect of anything in good faith done or 
purporting to be done under the provisions of this Regulation or the rules made 
thereunder. 


136. (/) If the person who contravenes any of the provisions of this 
Regulation is a company, every person who at the time the contravention was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to have 
contravened the provisions of this Regulation and shall be liable to penalty 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable for such contravention, if he proves that the contravention was 
committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent 
such contravention. 


[Part II— 


47 of 2023. 


5 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 55 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where a 
contravention under this Regulation has been committed by a company and it is 
proved that such contravention has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall be liable to be proceeded against for such 
contravention accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(6) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
137. If any person— 


(a) obstructs, or molests any person engaged or employed by the Board 
or any Planning and Development Authority or any person with whom the 
Board or Planning and Development Authority has entered into a contract, in 
the performance or execution by such person of his duty, or of anything 
which he is empowered or required to do under this Regulation, or of any 
rule made thereunder or under the contract, as the case may be, he shall be 
liable to a penalty which may extend to twenty thousand rupees; 


(b) removes any mark set up for the purpose of indicating any level or 
direction necessary to the execution of work authorised under this 
Regulation, he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees. 


138. (/) For the purpose of adjudicating penalties for contraventions under 
this Regulation, the Government may appoint an officer not below the rank of 
Under Secretary to the Government of India or any officer equivalent in rank, as 
an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalties. 


(2) The adjudicating officer referred to in sub-section (/) shall not impose 
any penalty on any person, unless such person— 


(a) is given a notice informing him of the grounds on which it is 
proposed to impose a penalty; 


(b) is given an opportunity of making a representation in writing within 
such reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the ground of 
imposition of penalty mentioned therein; and 


(c) is given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(3) The adjudicating officer may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of 
proceeding, grant time, to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing for 
reasons to be recorded in writing: 


Provided that no such adjournment shall be granted more than three times to 
a party during the proceeding. 


139. (J) Any person, who is aggrieved by an order or decision of 
adjudicating officer, may, within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of 
such order, prefer an appeal to the Secretary of the Department concerned, or 
before any officer equivalent in rank designated as such by the Government, as an 
appellate authority, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the 
period referred to in sub-section (/), if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented from sufficient cause for filing the appeal within the said period. 


Penalty for 
obstructing 
contractor or 
removing mark. 


Adjudication of 
penalties. 


Appeal against 
adjudication 
order. 


Penalties when 
realised, to be 
paid to Planning 
and Development 
Authority. 


Members and 
officers to be 
public servants. 


Finality of 


orders. 


Validation of act 
and proceedings. 


Power to 
delegate. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) An appeal shall be disposed of, except for sufficient reasons to be 
recorded in writing, within a period of sixty days from the date of its filing. 


(4) The amount of penalty imposed under the provisions of this Regulation, 
if not deposited, may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue. 


140. All penalties realised in connection with any contravention under this 
Regulation shall be paid to the concerned Planning and Development Authority. 


141. Every member, officer and other employee of the Board and of every 
Planning and Development Authority shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


142. Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Regulation, every order 
passed or direction issued by the Government or the Board, or order passed or 
notice issued by any Planning and Development Authority, under this Regulation 
shall be conclusive and enforceable. 


143. (1) No act or proceeding taken under this Regulation shall be 
questioned on the ground merely of— 


(a) the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in, the constitution of 
the Board or any Planning and Development Authority; or 


(6) the failure to serve a notice on any person, where no substantial 
injustice has resulted from such failure; or 


(c) any omission, defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case. 


(2) Every meeting of the Board and of any Planning and Development 
Authority, the minutes of the proceedings of which have been duly signed in such 
manner, as may be prescribed, shall be taken to have been duly convened and to be 
free from all defects and irregularities. 


144. (1) The Board may, by a resolution and with the previous consent of the 
concerned Planning and Development Authority, local authority, or the 
Government, as the case may be, direct that any power exercisable by it under this 
Regulation may also be exercised by any other Planning and Development 
Authority, local authority, or any officer of the Board or the Government, as may 
be specified in such resolution, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, 
as may be specified therein. 


(2) The respective Chief Town Planner may, by an order in writing and with 
the previous approval of the Board, direct that any of power exercisable by him 
under this Regulation may also be exercised by any Planning and Development 
Authority, local authority, or any officer of the Board or the Government, as may 
be specified in such order, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified therein. 


(3) Any Planning and Development Authority may, by a resolution and with 
the previous approval of the local authority or the Government, as the case may 
be, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Regulation, except the power 
to prepare any Master Plan, may also be exercised by a local authority or any 
officer of the Government or Planning and Development Authority, as may be 
specified in such resolution, in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified therein. 


(4) The Town Planning Officer of any Planning and Development Authority 
may, by order in writing, and with the previous approval of the Planning and 
Development Authority, direct that any power exercisable by him under this 
Regulation, may also be exercised by any officer of the Planning and Development 
Authority or local authority specified in such order, in such cases and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein. 


45 of 2023. 


16 of 1908. 


16 of 1908. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


145. (/) Every Planning and Development Authority shall carry out such 
directions as may be issued from time to time by the Government for the efficient 
administration of this Regulation. 


(2) If in, or in connection with, the exercise of its powers and discharge of 
its functions by any Planning and Development Authority under this Regulation, 
any dispute arises between the Planning and Development Authority and a local 
authority, it shall be referred to the decision of the Government, which shall be 
conclusive and enforceable. 


146. Every Planning and Development Authority shall furnish to the 
Government such reports and other information as the Government may from time 
to time require. 


147. (J) Save as provided in this Regulation, the provisions of this 
Regulation shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force— 


(a) when permission for development in respect of any land has been 
obtained under this Regulation, such development shall not be deemed to be 
not validly undertaken or carried out by reason only of the fact that the 
permission, approval or sanction required under such other law for such 
development has not been obtained; or 


(6) when permission for the development has not been obtained under 
this Regulation, such development shall not be deemed to be validly 
undertaken or carried out by reason only of the fact that permission, approval 
or sanction required under such other law for such development had been 
obtained. 


148. (/) Nothing in the Registration Act, 1908 shall be deemed to require the 
registration of any document, plan or map prepared, made or sanctioned, in 
connection with a Master Plan or town planning scheme under this Regulation. 


(2) All the documents, plans and maps referred to in sub-section (/) shall, for 
the purposes of sections 48 and 49 of the Registration Act, 1908, be deemed to 
have been registered in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation: 


Provided that copies of documents, plans and maps relating to a Master Plan 
or a sanctioned town planning scheme shall be sent to the office of the 
Sub-Registrar concerned, where such copies shall be kept and made accessible to 
the public in such manner as may be prescribed. 


149. When a local authority, which is a Planning and Development 
Authority, ceases to exist or ceases to have jurisdiction over any area included in a 
town planning scheme, the property and rights vested in such Planning and 
Development Authority under this Regulation, shall, subject to all charges and 
liabilities affecting the same, vest in such other Planning and Development 
Authority or Authorities as the Government may, with the consent of such 
Authority or Authorities, by notification, direct; and the Planning and 
Development Authorities or each of such Authorities shall have all the powers 
under this Regulation in respect of such town planning scheme or part thereof, 
which the Planning and Development Authority had, immediately before it ceased 
to exist or ceased to have jurisdiction. 


150. Where a local authority designated as a Planning and Development 
Authority under this Regulation is dissolved or superseded by any of the 
provisions of the Regulation under which it was constituted 


Control by 
Government. 


Reports and 
information. 


Effect of other 
laws. 


Registration of 
documents, plan 
or map in 
connection with 
Master Plan or 
town planning 
scheme not 
required. 


Vesting of 
property ceasing 
to have 
jurisdiction. 


Special 
provision in case 
of dissolution or 
supersession of a 
local authority. 


Default in 
exercise of 
power or 
performance of 
duty by Planning 
and 
Development 
Authority. 


Dissolution of 
Planning and 
Development 
Authorities. 


Power to make 
tules. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(a) the person appointed under such Regulation to exercise the powers 
and perform the functions of the local authority shall be deemed to be the 
Planning and Development Authority under this Regulation, and he may 
exercise all the powers and perform all the duties of a Planning and 
Development Authority under this Regulation during the period of 
dissolution or supersession of such local authority; 


(b) in the event of the person appointed as aforesaid exercising the 
powers and performing the duties of the Planning and Development 
Authority under this Regulation, any properties which, under the provisions 
of this Regulation, vest in the local authority as a Planning and Development 
Authority shall, during the period of the dissolution or supersession of the 
local authority, vest in the Government and such property shall, at the expiry 
of the said period vest in such authority as the Government may, by 
notification, direct. 


151. (/) If, in the opinion of the Government, any Planning and 
Development Authority is not competent to exercise or perform, or neglects or 
fails to exercise or perform, any power conferred or duty imposed upon it under 
any of the provisions of this Regulation, the Government or any person or persons 
appointed in this behalf by the Government may exercise such power or perform 
such duty. 


(2) Any expenses incurred by the Government or any person in exercising 
such power or performing such duty as referred to in sub-section (/), shall be met 
from the funds of the Planning and Development Authority and the Government 
may make an order directing any person who, for the time being, has custody of 
any such funds to pay such expenses from the said funds and such person shall be 
bound to obey such order. 


152. (7) Where the Government is satisfied that the purpose for which any 
Planning and Development Authority was established under this Regulation have 
been substantially achieved so as to render the continued existence of the Planning 
and Development Authority unnecessary, the Government may, by notification, 
declare that the Planning and Development Authority shall be dissolved with 
effect from such date as may be specified in such notification and such authority 
shall be deemed to be dissolved accordingly. 


(2) With effect from the date of dissolution of a Planning and Development 
Authority under sub-section (/),— 


(a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested, or realisable by the 
Planning and Development Authority shall vest in, or be realisable by the 
Government; 


(6) all liabilities which are enforceable against such authority shall be 
enforceable against the Government; and 


(c) for the purposes of carrying out any development in any area which 
has not been fully carried out by the authority before its dissolution and for 
the purpose of releasing properties, funds and dues referred to in clause (a), 
the functions of such authority shall be discharged by the Government. 


153. (J) The Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Regulation. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(i) the qualifications of a Chief Town Planner in town and country 
planning under section 3; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


(ii) term of office of the Members of the Board referred to in 
clauses (०) and (q) of sub-section (2) of section 4, the manner of filling 
casual vacancies among them and the allowances payable to them for 
attending the meetings of the Board under section 5; 


(iii) rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business in the 
meetings of the Board under section 7; 


(iv) other functions under clause (m) of sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(v) the period for approval or return of the Regional Plan under 
sub-section (/) of section 14; 


(vi) the qualification of the members under clause (b) of sub-section (7) 
of section 24; 


(vii) the terms and conditions of the members of the Planning 
Committee under sub-section (8) of section 24; 


(viii) term of office and the conditions of service of the chairperson and 
members of a Planning and Development Authority (other than the Town 
Planning Officer) under sub-section (/) of section 25; 


(ix) other functions under clause (7) of sub-section (/) of section 26; 


(x) time and places, and rules of procedure in regard to the regulation 
of business at its meetings of Planning and Development Authority under 
sub-section (/) of section 27; 


(xi) control and restrictions subject to which every Planning and 
Development Authority may appoint such number of officers and staff as may 
be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions and determination of 
their designation and grades under sub-section (/) of section 28; 


(xii) salaries and allowances and terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and staff of every Planning and Development Authority under 
sub-section (2) of section 28; 


(xiii) the form of land use map and land use register under 
sub-section (/) of section 29; 


(xiv) such other matters under sub-clause (xv) of clause (a) of 
sub-section (/) of section 33; 


(xv) time to consider the report of the Committee by the Planning and 
Development Authority under sub-section (5) of section 36; 


(xvi) time to approve or return the Master Plan by the Government 
under section 37; 


(xvii) the form and manner of issuance of a Development Right Certificate 
under sub-section (/) of section 43; 


(xviii) the manner of utilisation of transferable development right as 
additional built-up space by the owner under sub-section (2) of section 43; 


(xix) the manner of transfer of land and amenity in favour of the 
Planning and Development Authority or local authority for public purpose as 
specified in the Regional Plan or Master Plan by way of accommodation 
reservation under sub-section (/) of section 44; 


(xx) the manner of allotment of development right by way of 
transferable development right for posterity under section 45; 


(xxi) terms and conditions subject to which the Planning and 
Development Authority may allow the continuance of the use for a period 
not exceeding ten years of any land to the extent to which it was used on the 
date of publication of public notice under section 46; 


(xxii) the form of application, the particulars, and documents and plans 
accompanied thereto under sub-section (/) of section 48; 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(xxiii) the documents and plans to be accompanied with the information of 
the Department of the Central Government or Government or local authority, to 
the Planning and Development Authority, to carry out any development in 
respect of, or change of use of any land under sub-section (2) of section 48; 


(xxiv) the manner of communication of the order to the applicant under 
sub-section (7) of section 48; 


(xxv) the manner and fees for preferring an appeal under sub-section (2) 
of section 49; 


(xxvi) the manner of serving a notice requiring the Government to 
acquire his interest in land under sub-section (/) of section 51; 


(xxvii) the time and manner of claiming compensation for the refusal of 
such permission or for the grant thereof from the Planning and Development 
Authority under sub-section (/) of section 52; 


(xxviii) the time within which the claimant shall give the notice of 
refusal to accept compensation under sub-section (4) of section 52; 


(xxix) the particulars to be submitted together with the layout plan 
under sub-section (/) of section 53; 


(xxx) the manner of communicating the order to the applicant under 
sub-section (3) of section 53; 


(xxxi) the manner of inquiry by the Planning and Development 
Authority under sub-section (4) of section 53; 


(xxxii) the time and manner of claiming compensation for the 
expenditure incurred in carrying out any work in accordance with permission 
and which has been rendered abortive by the revocation or modification of 
such permission under sub-section (2) of section 54; 


(xxxiii) the time within which the claimant shall give the notice of 
refusal to accept compensation under sub-section (4) of section 54; 


(xxxiv) the development charge and penalty under clause (c) of 
sub-section (/) of section 56; 


(xxxv) the period and manner of applying for permission for retention 
or appeal to the Board under clauses (a) and (6) of sub-section (2) of 
section 56; 


(xxxvi) the period after the disposal or withdrawal of an application for 
permission or an appeal under sub-section (6) of section 56; 


(xxxvii) the period and manner of appeal to the Board under 
sub-section (2) of section 58; 


(xxxviii) the time and manner of claiming compensation in respect of 
the damage, or of any expenses reasonably incurred for complying with the 
notice under clause (b) of sub-section (4) of section 58; 


(xxxix) the period and manner of serving notice on the Government 
under clause (a) of sub-section (5) of section 58; 


(x/) the other matters not inconsistent with the objects of this 
Regulation under clause (n) of sub-section (4) of section 60; 


(x/i) the period within which the Government may, either give its 
consent to the publication of the draft scheme or direct the Planning and 
Development Authority to make such modifications in that draft scheme as it 
thinks fit under sub-section (/) of section 61; 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 61 


(x/ii) the manner of publication of draft scheme under sub-section (/) 
of section 63; 


(x/iii) the other particulars under clause (7) of section 64; 


(x/iv) the manner and method of entitlement to compensation from the 
Planning and Development Authority under sub-section (3) of section 65; 


(x/v) circumstances in which the period of one month to be reduced to 
fifteen days for inviting objections to the draft scheme under section 67; 


(x/vi) the form of application and scrutiny fees thereto to obtain the 
permission from the Planning and Development Authority under 
sub-section (/) of section 70; 


(x/vii) the manner of inquiry to be made by the Planning and 
Development Authority under sub-section (4) of section 70; 


(x/viii) the qualification of a Town Planning Officer under 
sub-section (/) of section 71; 


(xlix) the procedure to be followed by the Town Planning Officer to 
sub-divide the town planning scheme into a preliminary scheme and a final 
scheme under section 72; 


(0) the manner and form of notice to be given to the persons affected by 
preliminary town planning scheme under clause (a) of sub-section (/) of 
section 73; 


(/i) the form and manner of notice to be given by the Town Planning 
Officer before estimation of claims and payment of compensation to the 
owner, whose property or right is injuriously affected by the making of the 
town planning scheme under clause (/) of sub-section (3) of section 73; 


(17) the form and manner of drawing preliminary and the final town 
planning schemes under clause (4) of sub-section (3) of section 73; 


(liii) the form of communication of decision of the Town Planning 
Officer to the party concerned under section 75; 


(liv) the qualifications and experience of the Members of the Board of 
Appeal under sub-section (2) of section 76; 


(/v) the terms of appointment and conditions of service of the President 
of the Board of Appeal under sub-section (4) of section 76; 


(/vi) the procedure to be followed by the Planning and Development 
Authority for eviction of any person continuing to occupy any land which he 
is not entitled to occupy under the preliminary scheme under section 90; 


(91) the form of notice to be given by the Planning and Development 
Authority under sub-section (/) of section 91; 


(viii) the manner of publishing a draft of any variation under 
sub-section (2) of section 92; 


(Jix) the other particulars which the draft variation shall also contain 
under sub-section (3) of section 92; 


(x) the manner of publishing the requisite draft amendments in the 
final town planning scheme inviting suggestions or objections thereto under 
sub-section (/) of section 95; 


(/xi) the time to make a claim before the Town Planning Officer by the 
owner, whose property or right is injuriously affected by the making of a 
town planning scheme under section 105; 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1— 


(/xii) the period within which the owner of a plot is required to make 
payment of the excess amount as and when directed by the Town Planning 
Officer under sub-section (2) of section 108; 


(Zxiii) the classification on the basis of which the maximum and minimum 
development charges are fixed under sub-section (3) of section 115; 


(/xiv) the conditions for exemption from the levy of development 
charge on the development or change of use of any land under 
sub-section (5) of section 115; 


(xv) the manner of applying to the Planning and Development 
Authority by any person, who intends to carry out any development, or to 
institute, or change the use of any land for which permission under Chapter 
VII is necessary under sub-section (/) of section 117; 


(xvi) the time and the manner of filing appeal to the Board under 
sub-section (/) of section 118; 


(/xvii) the sums of money out of its funds which may be kept in the 
current account with the State Bank of India or any other bank as may be 
approved by the Government by every Planning and Development Authority 
under sub-section (4) of section 120; 


(Acviii) the form and manner of submission of statement of periodical review 
of balances to the Central Government under sub-section (6) of section 120; 


(/xix) the form and time annually for preparation of a budget in respect 
of the financial year next ensuing, showing the estimated receipts and 
expenditure of the Planning and Development Authority, and number of 
copies thereof to be forwarded through the Chief Town Planner 
(Administration), to the Government and the Board under section 121; 


(/xx) the form of annual statement of accounts including the balance 
sheet under sub-section (/) of section 122; 


(/xxi) the form of report and the date on or before which the Board shall 
prepare and submit it to the Government under sub-section (/) of section 123; 


(/xxii) the form of report and the date on or before which the Planning 
and Development Authority shall prepare and submit it to the Government 
under sub-section (2) of section 123; 


(/xxiii) the manner of and conditions subject to which every Planning 
and Development Authority shall, for the benefit of its officers and other 
employees, constitute such pension and provident funds as it may deem fit 
under sub-section (/) of section 124; 


(/xxiv) the fee on payment of which a certified copy of any plan or 
scheme or any part thereof may be given to any person under sub-section (2) 
of section 130; 


(xxv) the form and manner of preferring an appeal to the Secretary of 
the Department concerned, or before any officer equivalent in rank 
designated as such by the Government, as an appellate authority, under 
sub-section (/) of section 139; 


(7007) the manner of signing the minutes of the proceedings of every 
meeting of the Board and of any Planning and Development Authority under 
sub-section (2) of section 143; 


(xxvii) the manner of making accessible the copies of documents, plans 
and maps relating to a Master Plan or a sanctioned town planning scheme in the 
office of the Sub-Registrar concerned under sub-section (2) of section 148; 


(/xxviii) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contravention 
thereof shall be punishable with a penalty which may extend to five hundred 
rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional penalty 
which may extend to twenty-five rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continues after the first such contravention. 


(4) Every rule made under this section shall be laid as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(5) A Planning and Development Authority may, with the previous sanction 
of the Government, make regulations consistent with the provisions of this 
Regulation and the rules made thereunder to carry out the matters included in a 
Master Plan. 


(6) A regulation made under sub-section (5) may provide that a 
contravention thereof shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one hundred 
and fifty rupees, and in the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional 
penalty which may extend to ten rupees for every day during which such 
contravention continued after the first such contravention. 


(7) The power to make rules or regulations under this section shall be subject 
to the condition of previous publication and such publication shall be made in the 
Official Gazette and in such other manner as may be directed by the Government. 


154. (7) On the commencement of this Regulation, any other law in force in Repeal and 
its application to the Union territory of Lakshadweep corresponding to any of the saving. 
provisions of this Regulation, shall stand repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the 
provisions of such other law, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under 
the corresponding provisions of this Regulation. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


GORAKHA 


MGIPMRND—471 GI—28.07.2026 YADAVA 


