रजिस्ट्री Fe Ste Uer—( WA) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


The Gazette of Gudia 


OM. -ZT. Wet. -37.-082026-275358 
CG-DL-E-082026-275358 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 20] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, अगस्त 0, 2026/श्रावण 9, 948 (शक) 
No. 20] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, AUGUST 0, 2026/SRAVANA 9, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on l0th August, 2026:— 


Britt No. 53 oF 2026 


A Bill to improve the efficiency, ensure independence, transparency, and uniformity in 
the qualifications, appointment, terms and conditions of service of Chairpersons and 
Members of various Tribunals, the administration and functioning of the 
Tribunals, to establish a National Tribunals Commission and to make 
consequential amendments in related enactments and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
. (४) This Act may be called the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed 
for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into 
force of that provision. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


National 
Tribunals 
Commission. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Chairperson” includes Chairperson, Chairman, President and 
Presiding Officer of a Tribunal, but does not include the Chairperson of the 
Commission; 

(6) “Chairperson of the Commission” means the Chairperson of the 


National Tribunals Commission; 


(c) “Commission” means the National Tribunals Commission 
established under section 3; 


(d) “Member” includes Vice-Chairman, Vice-Chairperson, Vice-President, 
Accountant Member, Administrative Member, Judicial Member, Expert 
Member, Law Member and Technical Member of a Tribunal; 


(e) “Member of the Commission” means a Judicial Member or a 
Technical Member of the National Tribunals Commission; 


(f) “National Tribunals Data Grid” means a portal containing the 
repository of all case related information pertaining to Tribunals specified in 
the First Schedule; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(A) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Commission 
under section 9; 


(i) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Act; 


(j) “Search-cum-Selection Committee” means a Search-cum-Selection 
Committee constituted under section 3; 


(k) “Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the Commission referred to in 
section 8; and 


(0 “Tribunal” means a Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal or Authority as 
specified in column (2) of the First Schedule. 


CHAPTER II 
NATIONAL TRIBUNALS COMMISSION 
3. (7) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established a Commission to be called 


the National Tribunals Commission to exercise the powers conferred upon it and to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The headquarters of the National Tribunals Commission shall be at New 
Delhi. 


(3) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and four Members, of 
whom, two shall be Judicial Members and two shall be Technical Members. 


(4) A person shall be qualified for appointment— 


(a) as the Chairperson, if he has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or 
a Chief Justice of a High Court; 


(8) as a Judicial Member, if he has been a Chief Justice of a High Court 
or a Judge of a High Court; and 


(c) as a Technical Member, if he is a person of ability, integrity and 
standing, who has special knowledge and experience of not less than 
twenty-five years in the fields of public administration, finance, law, 
accountancy, banking, management or technology. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


4. The Commission shall— 


(a) conduct the selection process for filling up the vacancies of 
Chairpersons and Members of the Tribunals specified in the First Schedule, 
through the Search-cum-Selection Committees constituted under section |3; 


(6) review the performance of the Tribunals, and cause an annual 
report to be prepared and submitted to the Central Government; 


(c) oversee the conduct of inquiry into complaints against the 
Chairpersons and Members of the Tribunals; and 


(d) develop and maintain the National Tribunals Data Grid. 


5. (J) The Chairperson of the Commission and the Members of the 
Commission shall be appointed by the Central Government: 


Provided that the Central Government shall consult the Chief Justice of India 
before making an appointment to the post of Chairperson of the Commission and 
Judicial Members of the Commission. 


(2) The Chairperson of the Commission or a Member of the Commission 
shall hold office for a term of five years or till he attains the age of seventy years, 
whichever is earlier. 


(3) The salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of holding office 
of the Chairperson of the Commission and the Members of the Commission shall 
be such, as may be prescribed. 


(4) Where a vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of the Commission arises 
for any reason, the senior-most Judicial Member of the Commission shall act as the 
Chairperson of the Commission until the date on which a new Chairperson enters upon 
his office. 


(5) When the Chairperson of the Commission is unable to discharge his 
functions owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Judicial 
Member of the Commission shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson of the 
Commission until the date on which he resumes charge of his office. 


6. (J) The Chairperson of the Commission or any Member of the 
Commission may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign his office: 


Provided that the Chairperson of the Commission or a Member of the 
Commission shall, unless permitted by the Central Government to relinquish his 
office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the 
date of receipt of such notice, or until a Chairperson or Member appointed as his 
successor enters upon his office, or until the expiry of his term of office, 
whichever is earlier. 


(2) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the 
Chairperson of the Commission or a Member of the Commission, who— 


(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(6) has been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or 


(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such 
Chairperson of the Commission or a Member of the Commission; or 


(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson of the Commission or a 
Member of the Commission; or 


(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to the public interest. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Commission. 


Appointment, 
term of office, 
etc., of 
Chairperson of 
Commission and 
Members of 
Commission. 


Resignation and 
removal of 
Chairperson of 
Commission and 
Members of 
Commission. 


Vacancy, etc., 
not to invalidate 
actions. 


Secretariat of 
Commission. 


Meetings of 
Commission. 


Grants by 
Central 
Government. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) The Chairperson of the Commission or a Member of the Commission 
shall not be removed from his office on the ground specified in clause (d) or 
clause (e) of sub-section (2) unless he has been informed of the charges against 
him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in an inquiry held by a 
Committee constituted for the purpose in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Committee referred to in sub-section (3) shall be headed by a person 
who is a Judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the Chief Justice of India. 


7. No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of — 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the 
Commission; or 


(b) any defect in the appointment of the Chairperson of the 
Commission or a person acting as such Chairperson, or of a Member of the 
Commission. 


8. (/) The Central Government shall appoint an officer of the rank of Secretary 
to the Government of India as the Secretary of the Commission. 


(2) The Secretary of the Commission shall head the Secretariat and exercise 
such administrative and financial powers of the Commission, as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The number of officers and employees of the Secretariat and their 
appointment, terms and conditions of service shall be such, as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Secretariat shall, subject to the general and administrative oversight 
of the Chairperson of the Commission under sub-section (5), discharge such 
functions as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Chairperson of the Commission may issue such instructions and 
directions of general nature to the Secretariat as he may deem fit in the interest of 
efficient administration of the Commission. 


9. (/) The Commission shall observe such procedure in regard to the holding 
and transaction of business at its meetings in such manner as may be specified by 
regulations. 


(2) The Chairperson of the Commission shall preside over the meetings of 
the Commission. 


(3) When the Chairperson of the Commission is unable to attend a meeting 
of the Commission for any reason, the senior-most Judicial Member of the 
Commission present at the meeting shall preside over it. 


(4) All matters which are brought before the Commission, shall be decided 
by a majority of the Members of the Commission, including the Chairperson of the 
Commission, present and voting. 


(5) The Chairperson of the Commission shall have a casting vote. 


0. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of 
money as it may deem appropriate for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 


il. (J) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him, and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission 
shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit 
as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with the audit 
of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and 
papers, and to inspect any of the offices of the Commission. 


(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India, together with the audit report thereon, shall be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government, and that Government shall cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


2. (/) The Secretariat shall prepare, once in every year, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of the activities of the Commission during the 
previous year, and forward copies of such report, through the Commission, to the 
Central Government. 


(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (/) shall be laid by the 
Central Government, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 

CHAPTER III 
MANNER OF SELECTION AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF CHAIRPERSON 
AND MEMBERS OF TRIBUNAL 


3. (/) For the purpose of the selection of the Chairpersons and Members of 
the Tribunals specified in the First Schedule, the Commission shall constitute 
Search-cum-Selection Committees as may be required. 


(2) A Search-cum-Selection Committee in the case of selection of the 
Chairperson of a Tribunal shall consist of the following, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson, who shall be the Chairperson of the Commission; 


(b) one Member, who shall be a Technical Member of the 
Commission; 

(c) one Member, who shall be a retired Chief Justice of a High Court 
nominated by the Chairperson of the Commission; 


(d) one Member, who is a Secretary to the Government of India 
nominated by the Central Government: 


Provided that in case of appointment to the post of Chairperson of the 
State Administrative Tribunals, the Chief Secretary to the State Government 
concemed shall be the Member; 


(e) two Members, who are experts empanelled under section 5 who 
carried out the assessment of the suitability of candidates; and 


(f) one Member Secretary, who shall be the Secretary to the 
Commission. 


(3) A Search-cum-Selection Committee in the case of selection of the 
Members of a Tribunal shall consist of the following, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a Judicial Member of the Commission; 


(b) one Member, who shall be a Technical Member of the 
Commission; 


Furnishing of 
annual report to 
Central 
Government. 


Search-cum- 
Selection 
Committees. 


Appointment of 
Chairperson and 
Members of 
Tribunals. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(c) one Member, who shall be a retired Judge of a High Court 
nominated by the Chairperson of the Commission; 


(d) one Member, who is a Secretary to the Government of India 
nominated by the Central Government: 


Provided that in case of appointment to the post of Members of the 
State Administrative Tribunals, the Chief Secretary to the State Government 
concemed shall be the Member; 


(e) two Members, who are experts empanelled under section 5 who 
carried out the assessment of the suitability of candidates; and 


(f) one Member Secretary, who shall be the Secretary to the 
Commission. 


(4) The Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection Committee shall have the 
casting vote. 


(5) The Member Secretary and the expert Members shall not have any vote. 


(6) The Search-cum-Selection Committee, after the selection process, shall 
forward its recommendation to the Central Government through the Secretariat. 


(7) No act or proceeding of a Search-cum-Selection Committee shall be invalid 
merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Committee. 


4. (/) Notwithstanding the respective enactments relating to a Tribunal 
specified in the First Schedule, the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of such Tribunal shall be such, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Central Government shall, in making rules under this 
sub-section, take into consideration the experience and specialisation in the 
relevant field which may be required for appointment of a person as the 
Chairperson or a Member of a Tribunal. 


(2) The Chairperson and the Members of every Tribunal specified in the 
First Schedule shall be appointed by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of the Search-cum-Selection Committee constituted under 
section 3. 


(3) The office of the Chairperson of a Tribunal specified in the First 
Schedule may be filled either through a selection process or through a search 
process, as may be determined by the Search-cum-Selection Committee. 


(4) The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall adopt such comprehensive 
procedure for assessment of candidates as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the manner of scrutiny of applications and weightage for 
assessment of candidates shall be such as may be specified by regulations. 


(5) Where any person who is or has been a Chairperson or a Member of the 
Tribunal, applies for reappointment against an advertisement for selection in the 
Tribunal, the Search-cum-Selection Committee shall, while considering his 
candidature for selection as per sub-sections (/) and (4), consider his previous 
work performance in the Tribunal: 


Provided that where a Member is considered for reappointment, the 
Search-cum-Selection Committee shall consult the president or Chairperson of the 
concerned Tribunal, in cases other than the reappointment of a Member of a 
Tribunal constituted by the Central Government under section 44 of the Industrial 
Relations Code, 2020. 


(6) The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall recommend a suitable person 
for appointment to the post of Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, and shall 
recommend one additional name for each vacancy to be included in the waiting list. 


35 of 2020. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(7) The Secretariat shall communicate the recommendation of the 
Search-cum-Selection Committee, within a period of three days from the date of 
such recommendation, to the Central Government. 


(8) The Central Government shall process the recommendation of the 
Search-cum-Selection Committee and make the appointment thereto within a 
period of three months from the date of receipt of such recommendation. 


(9) No appointment shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or 
absence of a Member of the Commission or of a Search-cum-Selection Committee. 


5. (/) The Secretariat shall empanel experts from the relevant fields in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions of engagement including conflict of 
interest as may be specified by regulations, for providing assistance in the 
assessment of the suitability of candidates for the posts of Chairpersons and 
Members of Tribunals. 


(2) The experts who carry out the assessment of the suitability of candidates 
under sub-section (/) shall serve as members of the Search-cum-Selection 
Committee concerned as constituted under section 3. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by order, remove from office the 
Chairperson or Member of a Tribunal, who— 


(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or 
(6) has been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or 


(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as such 
Chairperson or Member of the Tribunal; or 


(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or Member of the Tribunal; or 


(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to the public interest; or 


(f) has been found incompetent or inefficient; or 


(g) has engaged, at any time during his term of office, in any paid 
assignment. 


(2) Where a complaint is received against a Chairperson or Member of a 
Tribunal on any ground specified in clauses (d) to (g) of sub-section (/), the 
Ministry or Department administering the Tribunal concerned shall conduct a 
preliminary inquiry to find out whether the complaint discloses such a ground and 
is supported by material facts and documents, and refer the matter to the 
Chairperson of the Commission for conduct of inquiry in such manner, as may be 
prescribed, and the Commission shall, after such inquiry, submit its 
recommendation to the Central Government, for appropriate action, if any. 


(3) No Chairperson or Member of a Tribunal shall be removed from his 
office on the grounds specified in clauses (d) to (g) of sub-section (/) unless a 
reference has been made in this behalf to the Commission and an inquiry has been 
made under sub-section (2). 


(4) The Central Government shall, on receipt of the recommendation of the 
Commission under sub-section (2), take appropriate action as required. 


7. (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force,— 
(a) the Chairperson of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five 
years or till he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier; and 


(b) a Member of a Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years or 
till he attains the age of sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier. 


Empanelment of 
experts. 


Removal of 
Chairperson and 
Members of 
Tribunals. 


Term of office 
of Chairperson 
and Member of 
Tribunal. 


Qualifications, 
manner of 
selection, etc., of 
Chairpersons 
and Members of 
Tribunals under 
certain 
enactments to be 
governed by this 
Act. 


Power of 
Commission to 
make 
regulations. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) The Chairperson or Member of a Tribunal shall be eligible for 
consideration for reappointment in accordance with the provisions of section 4. 


8. (/) The provisions relating to qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other conditions of 
service and eligibility for reappointment of the Chairpersons and Members of the 
Tribunals under the enactments specified in column (3) of the First Schedule, shall 
stand amended in the manner as specified in the Second Schedule. 


(2) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to 
do, it may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, amend the First Schedule 
and thereupon, the said Schedule shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly. 


(3) A copy of every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid 
before each House of Parliament, as soon as may be after it is issued. 


CHAPTER IV 
MISCELLANEOUS 


9. (J) The Commission may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
for the purposes of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may provide for— 


(a) the manner of holding and transaction of business of the 
Commission at its meetings under sub-section (/) of section 9; 


(6) the manner of advertisement of vacancies and processing of 
applications; 


(c) the manner of scrutiny of applications and weightage for assessment of 
candidates under the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 4; and 


(d) the manner of empanelment of experts, their terms and conditions of 
engagement including conflict of interest under sub-section (/) of section 5. 


(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation. 


20. (/) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of holding 
office of the Chairperson of the Commission and the Members of the 
Commission under sub-section (3) of section 5; 


(b) the manner of constitution of committee and for holding inquiry 
under sub-section (3) of section 6; 


(c) the administrative and financial powers of the Commission to be 
exercised by the Secretary of the Commission under sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(d) the number of officers and employees of the Secretariat and their 
appointment, terms and conditions of service under sub-section (3) of section 8; 


(e) the functions of the Secretariat under sub-section (4) of section 8; 


33 of 202]. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


(f) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts under 
sub-section (/) of section I; 


(g) the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, salaries and 
allowances, resignation, removal and other conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and Members of Tribunals under sub-section (/) of section 4; 


(४) the comprehensive procedure for assessment of candidates under 
sub-section (4) of section 4; 


(i) the manner of conduct of inquiry under sub-section (2) of 
section l6; and 


(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


2i. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the Commission or any officer of the Central Government 
or the Chairperson of the Commission or any Member of the Commission or any 
other officer or employee of the Commission, for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder. 


22. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment specified in column (3) of the 
First Schedule. 


23. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of 
three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


24. (/) The Tribunals Reforms Act, 202] is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,— 


(a) anything done or any action taken under the enactments specified in 
column (3) of the First Schedule, shall be as valid and as effective in law as 
if such thing or action was done or taken under the corresponding provisions 
of those enactments, as amended by the Second Schedule to this Act; 


(b) the salary, allowances and the other terms and conditions of service 
of the Chairperson and Members of a Tribunal specified in the First 
Schedule, appointed on or after the commencement of this Act, shall be 
governed by the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder; 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(c) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and Members of any Tribunal specified in the First 
Schedule, whose appointments were made on or before the Ist October, 202] 
based on the selection or recommendation of the Search-cum-Selection 
Committee made in accordance with the provisions of the respective 
enactments or the rules made thereunder, shall continue to be governed by 
such enactments or the rules made thereunder; 


(d) in other cases, where any person was appointed as the Chairperson 
or Member of a Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of Chapter II of 
the Tribunals Reforms Act, 202, on or after the 4th April, 202! and before 
the commencement of this Act, and holding office as such immediately 
before the date of commencement of this Act, shall continue to hold office 
till the completion of a term of five years from the date of such appointment, 
or the age of seventy years, or sixty-seven years, as the case may be, 
whichever is earlier, and shall be eligible for reappointment; and 


(e) subject to the provisions of clause (d), the salary, allowances and 
the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of 
any Tribunal specified in the First Schedule, who were appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of Chapter II of the Tribunals Reforms 
Act, 202l, before the commencement of this Act, and holding office as such 
on the date of commencement of this Act, may not be varied to their 
disadvantage till the completion of their respective term. 


(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 202! and 


anything contained in any judgment, order or decree of any Court, or in any law 
for the time being in force,— 


(a) any Search-cum-Selection Committee constituted in respect of any 
Tribunal specified in the First Schedule, as per the provisions of the 
Tribunals Reforms Act, 202] or the rules made thereunder, prior to the 
establishment of the National Tribunals Commission under this Act, shall 
continue and complete the process of selection of Chairperson and Members 
of such Tribunal under the Tribunals Reforms Act, 202l, and the 
appointment, salary, allowances and the other terms and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson or Member so selected and appointed shall be 
governed by the provisions of this Act; and 


(b) the appointment of any person as Chairperson or Chairman or 
President or Vice-Chairperson or Vice-Chairman or Vice-President or 
Presiding Officer or Member of a Tribunal, Appellate Tribunal, or as the 
case may be, other Authority, on the basis of selection or recommendation 
already made by the Search-cum-Selection Committee in accordance with 
the provisions of Chapter II of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 202, before the 
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been made under the 
provisions of this Act. 


(4) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the provisions of 


section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 897 shall apply with regard to the effect 
of repeal. 


33 of 202]. 


33 of 202]. 


33 of 202]. 


33 of 202]. 


33 of 202]. 


0 of 897. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 


[See section 2(/)] 
SL. Tribunal/A ppellate Enactments 
No. Tribunal/Authority 
() (2) (3) 
l. Customs, Excise and The Customs Act, 962 (52 of 962) 
Service Tax Appellate 
Tribunal 
2. Appellate Tribunal The Smugglers and Foreign Exchange 
Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) 
Act, 976 (3 of 976) 
3. Central Administrative The Administrative Tribunals Act, l985 
Tribunal ((3 of 985) 
4. State Administrative The Administrative Tribunals Act, l985 
Tribunals (3 of 985) 
5. Railway Claims Tribunal The Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 987 
(54 of 987) 
6. Securities Appellate The Securities and Exchange Board of 
Tribunal India Act, 992 (5 of 992) 
7. Debts Recovery Tribunal The Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy 
Act, 993 (5 of 993) 
8. Debts Recovery The Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy 
Appellate Tribunal Act, 993 (5] of 993) 
9. Telecom Disputes The Telecom Regulatory Authority of 
Settlement and Appellate —_ India Act, 997 (24 of 997) 
Tribunal 
0. Appellate Tribunal for The Electricity Act, 2003 (36 of 2003) 
Electricity 
ll. Armed Forces Tribunal The Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007 
(55 of 2007) 
2. National Green Tribunal The National Green Tribunal Act, 200 
(9 of 200) 
3. National Company Law The Companies Act, 203 (8 of 203) 
Appellate Tribunal 
4. National Consumer The Consumer Protection Act, 20l9 
Disputes Redressal (35 of 209) 
Commission 
5. Industrial Tribunal The Industrial Relations Code, 2020 
constituted by the Central (35 of 2020) 
Government 
6. Income-tax Appellate The Income-tax Act, 2025 (30 of 2025). 


Tribunal 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
(See section 8) 
Amendments to certain enactments Marginal headings 
(l) (2) 
l. In section 29 of the Customs Act, 962, for Amendment of 
sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be Act 52 of 962. 


substituted, namely: — 


“(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service and eligibility for reappointment 
of a President, Vice-President and other Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by 
the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


2. For section 2A of the Smugglers and Foreign 


Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 976, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“_[20., Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and eligibility 
for reappointment of a Chairperson and Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by 
the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


3. For section |0B of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 985, 


the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“]08., Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of _ selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and eligibility 
for reappointment of a Chairman and Members of the 
Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by the 
provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


4. For section 9A of the Railway Claims Tribunal 


Act, 987, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“9A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service and eligibility for reappointment 
of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and other Members of 
the Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by the 
provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


5. For section I5QA of the Securities and Exchange 


Board of India Act, 992, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely: — 


“I5QA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service and eligibility for reappointment of 
a Presiding Officer and Members of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by 
the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


Amendment of 
Act |3 of 976. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act |3 of 985. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act 54 of 987. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act I5 of 992. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(I) 


(2) 


6. In the Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy 
Act, 993,— 


(a) for section 6A, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“6A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and 
eligibility for reappointment of a Presiding Officer of 
the Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by the 
provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”; 


(b) for section 5A, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“I5A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and 
eligibility for reappointment of a Chairperson of the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed 
by the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms 
Act, 2026.”. 


7. For section l4GA of the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India Act, 997, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“l4GA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of _ selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and eligibility 
for reappointment of a Chairperson and Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by 
the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


8. For section l7A of the Electricity Act, 2003, the 
following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“ "| |768., Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and eligibility 
for reappointment of a Chairperson and Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by 
the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


9. For section 9A of the Armed Forces Tribunal Act, 2007, 
the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“QA. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service and eligibility for reappointment 
of a Chairperson and Members of the Tribunal under 
this Act shall be governed by the provisions of the 
Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


Amendment of 
Act 5 of 993. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act 24 of 997. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act 36 of 2003. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act 55 of 2007. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(I) 


(2) 


0. For section I0A of the National Green Tribunal 


Act, 200, the following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“I0A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, 
the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service and eligibility for reappointment of 
a Chairperson, Judicial Member and Expert Member of 
the Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by the 
provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


ll. For section 47A of the Companies Act, 203, the 


following section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“47A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and eligibility 
for reappointment of a Chairperson and Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be governed by 
the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


2. In section 55 of the Consumer Protection Act, 209, 


for sub-section (JA), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“([A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of _ selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and eligibility 
for reappointment of a President and members of the 
National Commission under this Act shall be governed 
by the provisions of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”. 


3. In the Industrial Relations Code, 2020, in 


section 44,— 


(a) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, 
removal and other conditions of service and 
eligibility for reappointment of Judicial Member and 
Administrative Member of an Industrial Tribunal 
under this Act shall be governed by the provisions of 
the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026.”; 


(b) for sub-section (9), the following sub-section 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(9) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a 
temporary absence) occurs in a National Industrial 
Tribunal or the Tribunal constituted by the State 
Government under sub-section (/), then, such 
vacancy shall be filled up in such manner as may be 
prescribed, without prejudice to sub-section (5), and 
the proceeding shall be continued before such 
National Industrial Tribunal or the Tribunal 
constituted by the State Government, from the stage 
at which the vacancy is filled.”. 


Amendment of 
Act 9 of 200. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act 8 of 203. 


Selection, 
qualifications, 
conditions of 
service, 
allowances, etc. 


Amendment of 
Act 35 of 209. 


Amendment of 
Act 35 of 2020. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


I5 


(l) (2) 
4. In section 36] of the Income-tax Act, 2025, for Amendment of 
sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be Act 30 of 2025. 


substituted, namely:— 


“(2) Irrespective of anything contained in this Act, 
the qualifications, manner of selection, appointment, 
salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service and eligibility for reappointment 
of the President, Vice-President and other Members of 
the Appellate Tribunal appointed after the 
commencement of the Tribunals Reforms Act, 2026, 
shall be governed by the provisions of the said Act.”. 


l6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Central Government initiated the process of rationalisation of Tribunals 
in the year 20I5. Through the Finance Act, 207, certain Tribunals were abolished 
or merged and the Central Government was empowered to make rules to provide 
for the appointments, tenure and qualifications of Chairpersons and Members of 
various Tribunals. Subsequently, the Tribunals Reforms (Rationalisation and 
Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 202l was promulgated on the 4th April, 202], 
which was replaced by the Tribunals Reforms Act, 202l. The said Act, inter alia, 
stipulated the procedure for selection and appointment of Chairpersons and 
Members of various Tribunals and provided for their uniform terms and conditions 
of service. 


2. The Supreme Court, in the matter of Madras Bar Association vs. Union of 
India [(2026) 2 SCC 7], struck down certain provisions of the Tribunals Reforms 
Act, 202, inter alia, on the grounds that they are contrary to the principles of 
separation of powers and judicial independence and not in consonance with the 
earlier judicial pronouncements that have clarified the standards governing the 
appointment, tenure and functioning of Chairpersons and Members of Tribunals. 
Further, the Court, inter alia, directed for the establishment of a National 
Tribunals Commission, which is independent, has professional expertise, and 
adopts a transparent process and oversight mechanism for selection and 
appointment of Chairpersons and Members of various Tribunals. 


3. Accordingly, in consonance with the directions of the Supreme Court in 
various judgments including Madras Bar Association vs. Union of India, 
[(2026) 2 SCC I], it is proposed to repeal the Tribunals Reforms Act, 202] and 
introduce the Tribunals Reforms Bill, 2026, which, inter alia, provides for the 
establishment of the National Tribunals Commission, the qualifications, manner of 
selection, appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service of the Chairpersons and Members of various Tribunals 
specified in the First Schedule to the Bill. It is also proposed to make necessary 
consequential amendments in the related enactments governing various Tribunals. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; ARJUN RAM MEGHWAL. 
The 6th August, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Tribunals 
Commission (the said Commission) to be headed by a former Judge of the 
Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court, along with two Judicial and two 
Technical Members, and a Secretariat headed by an officer of the rank of 
Secretary to the Government of India with required officers and staff. The Bill also 
seeks for the creation of two additional posts of Level-l4 (Joint Secretary Level) 
for the Secretariat of the said Commission. 


2. The proposal involves the creation of posts and consequent administrative 
expenditure for the said Commission and its Secretariat. It is estimated that 
recurring expenditure of 24.79 crore rupees and non-recurring expenditure of 
2.35 crore rupees, totalling 27.4 crore rupees, per annum, is likely to be incurred. 
Further, an increase of 0 per cent. in recurring expenditure in the second and 
third year over the previous year, and 20 per cent. or 25 per cent. of non-recurring 
expenditure earmarked for the first year, is expected. 


3. In view of the above, the Bill if enacted would involve expenditure as 
stated hereinabove from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for establishment of a Commission to be called 
the National Tribunals Commission to exercise the powers conferred upon it and 
to perform the functions assigned to it under the proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause (/) of clause 9 of the Bill empowers the National Tribunals 
Commission to make regulations not inconsistent with the proposed legislation 
and the rules made thereunder, in consultation with the Central Government. 
Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in respect of which such regulations may be 
made. These matters, inter alia, include— 


(a) the manner of holding and transaction of business of the 
Commission at its meetings under sub-section (/) of section 9; (b) the 
manner of advertisement of vacancies and processing of applications; (c) the 
manner of scrutiny of applications and weightage for assessment of 
candidates under the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 4; and (d) the 
manner of empanelment of experts, their terms and conditions of 
engagement including conflict of interest under sub-section (/) of section 5. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 9, inter alia, provides that every regulation made 
by the National Tribunals Commission under the proposed legislation is required 
to be laid before each House of Parliament 


2. Sub-clause (/) of clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government 
to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation and to 
publish the same in the Official Gazette. Sub-clause (2) specifies the matters in 
respect of which such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include— 


(a) the salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of holding 
office of the Chairperson of the Commission and the Members of the 
Commission under sub-section (3) of section 5; (6) the manner of 
constitution of committee and for holding inquiry under sub-section (3) of 
section 6; (c) the administrative and financial powers of the Commission to 
be exercised by the Secretary of the Commission under sub-section (2) of 
section 8; (d) the number of officers and employees of the Secretariat and 
their appointment, terms and conditions of service under sub-section (3) of 
section 8; (e) the functions of the Secretariat under sub-section (4) of 
section 8; (f) the form for preparing annual statement of accounts under 
sub-section (/) of section l; (8) the qualifications, manner of selection, 
appointment, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other 
conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members of Tribunals under 
sub-section (/) of section l4; (4) the comprehensive procedure for 
assessment of candidates under sub-section (4) of section 4; () the manner 
of conduct of inquiry under sub-section (2) of section 6; and (/) any other 
matter which is to be, or may be prescribed for carrying out the purposes of 
this Act. 


Sub-clause (3) of clause 20 provides that every rule made under the proposed 
legislation is required to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


3. The matters in respect of which regulations and rules may be made are 
matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for 
them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a 
normal character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


BILL No. 54 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 957. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and Short title and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026. 2 आह 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Insertion of new 
section 9D. 


Certain 
conditions or 
restrictions on 
imposition of 
tax, cess, etc. 


Amendment of 
section |3. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. In the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 957 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, after the words 
“regulation of mines”, the words “and mineral bearing lands” shall be inserted. 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act, after clause (ad), the following clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ada) “mineral bearing land” means any land having the mineral 
contents in accordance with the parameters prescribed under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 5;’. 


4. After section 9C of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“OD. (7) No tax, cess or such other levy (by whatever name called) 
shall be imposed by the State Government on— 


(a) mineral rights; or 


(6) mineral bearing lands, either based on mineral quantity or 
mineral value or royalty payable or otherwise, 


except in accordance with such conditions or restrictions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, or in any judgment, decree or order of any court, the 
imposition of any such tax, cess or other levy by the State Government on— 


(a) mineral rights; or 


(6) mineral bearing lands either based on mineral quantity or 
mineral value or royalty payable or otherwise, 


which is not deposited with the State Government or recovered by it before 
the commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, shall be deemed to be invalid at all 
material times: 


Provided that any such tax, cess or other levy on mineral rights or on 
mineral bearing lands, already deposited with the State Government or 
recovered by it before such commencement, shall not be liable to be 
refunded.” 


5. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (¢), the 
following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ta) the conditions or restrictions on imposition of tax, cess or such 
other levy under sub-section (/) of section 9D;”. 


67 of 957. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2. 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Minerals constitute an important natural resource which are of great 
geopolitical importance and are critical to infrastructure (including digital 
infrastructure), manufacturing, energy security, and the overall economic 
development of the country. Sustainable and uniform development of minerals 
across the country is an important pillar to subserve the public interest. Hence, in 
view of the larger public interest, the Union has taken under its control the 
regulation of mines and the development of minerals under section 2 of the Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 957 (the MMDR Act). 


2. Mineral resources are finite and concentrated in a few States, and their 
extraction and management have to be guided by long-term national goals of 
sustainable, equitable and uniform development integrated into the overall strategy 
of the country’s economic development. Any regional disparity in fiscal 
impositions on minerals impacts public interest. Unbalanced imposition of steep 
taxes and levies will prompt the industry to completely bypass local supply lines, 
leading to sub-optimal development of markets, increased transportation costs and 
the resultant pollution load. There is also a risk of an increase in imports of 
minerals despite having sufficient local mineral resources as domestic mineral 
supply becomes expensive. The uneven imposition of taxes or other levies on 
mineral rights and mineral bearing lands by the State Governments in the absence 
of reasonable limitations have resulted in various issues, such as— 


(i) heavy tax burden in the sector; 


(ii) unpredictable introduction of tax, cess and other levies, even after 
commencement of mining operations; 


(iii) multiple taxes, cess and other levies on production or dispatch of 
minerals; 


(iv) non-uniformity of rates of tax and other levies among States; 
(v) imposition of tax, cess or levies with retrospective effect. 


3. Excessive fiscal burden makes mining operations commercially unviable, 
discourages mineral extraction, adversely affects mineral production and in some 
cases, leads to closure of mines. Any additional and unpredictable costs 
disproportionately may lead to adverse impact on small and medium-scale mining 
operators. Multiple and inconsistent taxes hamper development of the mineral 
industry and slow down economic growth resulting in cascading tax effect and 
high compliance costs. An excessive tax burden at the extraction stage or 
otherwise may ultimately increase the cost of goods and services and, 
consequently, the cost of living for the common citizen in the country. Further, 
any retrospective imposition of taxes would cause legal uncertainty and erode 
investors’ trust. 


4. Any fiscal burden imposed on mineral extraction should be guided by a 
uniform and balanced fiscal framework across the country. The cumulative 
incidence of different levies should not become disproportionate to the economic 
value and profitability of the mining operations. There is also a need to ensure 
certainty, stability and predictability of the fiscal regime applicable to mining. The 
State has the power, coupled with the duty as a trustee of natural resources of the 
nation, to advance the national interest, inter alia, by ensuring harmonised mineral 
development (and consequent economic development) across the nation, rather 
than creating localised pockets of mineral resource driven growth. 


5. The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2026, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(i) the Union will take under its control the regulation of mineral 
bearing lands having the mineral contents in accordance with the parameters 
prescribed by the Central Government under the MMDR Act. This is in 
addition to the existing provision which declares the Union’s control over the 
regulation of mines and the development of minerals; 


(ii) insertion of a new section 9D in the MMDR Act which provides 
that no tax, cess or such other levy (by whatever name called) shall be 
imposed by the State Government on mineral rights; or mineral bearing 
lands, either based on mineral quantity, mineral value, royalty or otherwise, 
except in accordance with such conditions or restrictions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government. It further seeks to provide that any 
such tax, cess or other levy which is not deposited with the State 
Government or recovered by it before the commencement of the Mines and 
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, shall be 
deemed to be invalid at all material times. However, any such tax, cess or 
other levy on mineral rights or on mineral bearing lands, already deposited 
with the State Government or recovered by it before such commencement, 
shall not be liable to be refunded. 


6. The above amendments strive to provide certainty, stability and 


predictability in the fiscal regime in the mineral sector, thereby giving impetus to 
national economic growth which would facilitate the aims of Atmanirbhar Bharat 
and ultimately attaining the vision of Viksit Bharat 2047. 


7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; G. KISHAN REDDY. 
The 7th August, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment 
Bill, 2026, if enacted, would not involve any expenditure, either recurring or 
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 957 so as to empower the Central 
Government to make rules for prescribing the conditions or restrictions subject to 
which the State Government may impose tax, cess or such other levy on mineral 
rights or on mineral bearing lands. 


2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made under the aforesaid 
provision are matters of detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the 
Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


Sec. 2 | THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


LOK SABHA 


CORRIGENDUM 
to 
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2026 
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha] 


S. No. | Page No. | Line No. For Read 
L 2 20 “imposition of any such | “imposition of such 
tax,” tax,” 
NEW DELHI; 


August 08,2026 __ 
Sravana 7, 948 (Saka) 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


BiLt No. 55 oF 2026 


A Bill to alter the name of the State of Kerala. 

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 

l. (J) This Act may be called the Kerala (Alteration of Name) Act, 2026. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 

(a) “appointed day” means the date appointed under sub-section (2) of 
section |; 


(5) “appropriate Government” means, as respects a law relating to a 
matter enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the 
Central Government, and as respects any other law, the State Government; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Alteration of 
name of State of 
Kerala. 


Amendment of 
article 3lA. 


Amendment of 
article 290A. 


Amendment of 
First Schedule to 
Constitution. 


Amendment of 
Fourth Schedule 
to Constitution. 


Power to adapt 
laws. 


Power to 
construe laws. 


Legal 
proceedings. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


(c) “law” includes any enactment, Ordinance, regulation, order, bye-law, 
rule, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law in the 
whole or any part of the State of Kerala. 


3. On and from the appointed day, the State of Kerala shall be known as the 
State of Keralam. 


4. In article 3lA of the Constitution, in clause (2), in sub-clause (a), in 
item (7), for the word “Kerala”, the word “Keralam” shall be substituted. 


5. In article 290A of the Constitution, for the word “Kerala”, the word 
“Keralam” shall be substituted. 


6. In the First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “I. THE 
STATES”, in entry 5, under the column “Name”, for the word “Kerala”, the word 
“Keralam” shall be substituted. 


7. In the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading “TABLE”, in 
entry 9, in the second column, for the word “Kerala”, the word “Keralam” shall be 
substituted. 


8. (/) For the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of the name of the State 
of Kerala by section 3, the appropriate Government may, before the expiration of 
one year from the appointed day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications 
of any law made before the appointed day, whether by way of repeal or amendment, 
as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect 
subject to the adaptations and modifications so made. 


(2) Nothing in sub-section (/) shall be deemed to prevent a competent 
Legislature or other competent authority from repealing or amending any law 
adapted or modified by the appropriate Government under the said sub-section. 


9. Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been made 
under section 8 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, 
tribunal or authority, required or empowered to enforce such law, may construe the 
law in such manner, without affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper 
in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority. 


0. Where immediately before the appointed day any legal proceedings are 
pending to which the State of Kerala is a party, the State of Keralam shall be deemed 
to have been substituted for the State of Kerala in those proceedings. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Government of Kerala forwarded to the Central Government, the 
resolution passed by the Legislative Assembly of Kerala on 24th June, 2024 stating, 
inter alia, that necessary steps may be taken to amend the First Schedule to the 


Constitution by modifying the name of State of “Kerala” as “Keralam” in 
accordance with article 3 of the Constitution. 


2. As required by the proviso to article 3 of the Constitution, the President 
referred the Bill to the Legislature of the State of Kerala for expressing its views 
thereon. The Legislative Assembly of Kerala considered the Kerala (Alteration of 
Name) Bill, 2026 and adopted a unanimous Resolution agreeing with the Bill. 


3. The Kerala (Alteration of Name) Bill, 2026 provides for such alteration of 
name of the State of Kerala and contains necessary amendments to the provisions 
of the Constitution and also consequential provisions. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 29th July, 2026. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 3 OF 


[Copy of letter No. 902/0/2026-SR dated the 07.08.2026 from Shri Amit 
Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation to the Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha] 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed 
“Kerala (Alteration of Name) Bill, 2026”, recommends the introduction of the Bill 
in the Lok Sabha under article 3 of the Constitution of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill empowers the State Government to adapt and modify 
existing laws for the purpose of giving effect to the alteration of name of the State 
of Kerala to Keralam by clause 3. This power will be available only for a period of 
one year from the appointed day. The adaptations and modifications cannot affect 
the substance of the laws adapted. 


2. The delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


BiLt No. 56 oF 2026 


A Bill further to amend the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, |962. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the National Co-operative Development Short title and 
Corporation (Amendment) Act, 2026. onsen 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


26 of 962. 2. In the National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, 962 eae of 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 2,— veces 


(a) clause (aba) shall be omitted; 


Omission of 
section 2A. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


(5) after clause (5), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ba) “co-operative development” means planning, promoting and 
financing programmes, whether directly or through any intermediary 
entity, to co-operative societies;’; 


(c) in clause (c), for the words and figures “the Multi-State Co-operative 
Societies Act, 984 or under any other law with respect to co-operative 
societies for the time being in force in any State”, the words and figures “the 
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 or under any other law with 
respect to co-operative societies for the time being in force” shall 
be substituted; 


(d) in clause (da), after sub-clause (viii), the following sub-clauses shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“(ix) processed food and other edible products; 


(x) any other food items as may be notified by the Central 
Government;”’; 


(e) in clause (dba), for the words “in the rural area and includes any 
handicrafts or rural crafts”, the words “including any handicrafts or other 
crafts” shall be substituted; 


(f) after clause (dd), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(de) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed 
accordingly;’. 


3. Section 2A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


4. In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), clause (vii) shall 


be omitted. 


5. In section 9 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) for the words “, through co-operative societies”, the words “‘for 
co-operative development” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (a), for the words “and notified commodities”, the 
words “, notified commodities and industrial goods” shall be 
substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) for clause (0), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(b) provide funds to State Governments for financing 
co-operative societies or any entity engaged in co-operative 
development, for the purchase of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, 
livestock, poultry feed, industrial goods, notified commodities and 
notified services on behalf of the Central Government, to the extent 
such funds are used for co-operative societies;”; 


(zi) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(da) provide loans and grants directly to co-operative 
societies or any entity engaged in co-operative development to the 
extent such funds are used for co-operative societies, subject to 
furnishing security, as may be required by the Corporation;”; 


5] of 984. 


39 of 2002. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(iii) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(g) with the approval of the Central Government, participate 
in the share capital of co-operative societies other than a 
co-operative society referred to in clause (7), or any entity engaged 
in co-operative development.”; 


(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(4) The entity engaged in co-operative development shall be such 
as may be determined by the Board.”. 


6. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, Insertion of 
namely:— new section 9A. 
“QA. The Corporation may do all such things as may be necessary or Incidental 
powers. 


incidental to or consequential upon the exercise of its powers, discharge of its 
functions and the performance of its duties, under this Act, or under any other 
law for the time being in force.”. 


7. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, apenas oF 
new section 
namely:— I3A. 


“_|३/ The Corporation may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of Credit | 
its functions under this Act, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, 22242 0 
the Reserve Bank or any banking company or such other financial institution 
as may be notified by the Central Government in this behalf, credit 
information or other information.”. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The National Co-operative Development Corporation Act, !962 was enacted 
to provide for the incorporation and regulation of the National Co-operative 
Development Corporation for planning, and promoting programmes, through 
co-operative societies, for the production, processing, marketing, storage, export 
and import of agricultural produce, foodstuffs, industrial goods, livestock and 
certain other commodities and services and for matters connected therewith. 


2. The Act was amended in the years 973, 974 and 2002 to diversify the 
sources of funds of the Corporation, expand the scope of its activities, enable direct 
financing of eligible co-operative societies and include notified services within its 
mandate. The statutory framework continues to envisage financial assistance either 
through State Governments or directly to registered co-operative societies. 


3. The co-operative sector has expanded and diversified considerably in recent 
years. Statutory bodies, State Government agencies and other specialised entities 
are increasingly engaged in providing infrastructure, technology, processing, 
marketing, financial and other services for the development of co-operatives. Since 
such entities may not be registered as co-operative societies, the Corporation is 
presently unable to finance them directly, even where their activities are intended to 
benefit the co-operative sector. Consequently, such proposals are required to be 
routed through State Governments or co-operative societies, resulting in procedural 
delays and limited uptake. 


4. The establishment of a separate Ministry of Cooperation in July, 202] and 
the initiatives undertaken by the Central Government in furtherance of the vision of 
“Sahakar se Samriddhi” have substantially enhanced the role of the Corporation in 
co-operative development. 


5. In view of the expanding requirements of the co-operative sector, it is 
considered necessary to broaden the mandate of the Corporation from planning and 
promoting programmes through co-operative societies to plan and promote 
programmes for co-operative development. It is proposed to enable the Corporation 
to provide loans and grants directly to co-operative societies or any entity engaged 
in co-operative development to the extent such funds are used for co-operative 
societies, subject to furnishing security as may be required by the Corporation. The 
National Co-operative Development Corporation (Amendment) Bill, 2026, provides 
for the Corporation to participate in the share capital of any co-operatives or any 
entity engaged in co-operative development, with the approval of the Central 
Government. The co-operative societies shall continue to remain the primary 
beneficiaries, while the proposed Bill widens the institutional channels through 
which assistance may reach and strengthen the co-operative sector. 


6. Further, the National Co-operative Development Corporation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2026, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:— 


(a) to expand the definition of “foodstuffs” to include any other food 
items as may be notified by the Central Government; 


(b) to remove the geographical restriction applicable to industrial goods 
so as to enable assistance for such activities irrespective of their location; 


(c) to update certain statutory references and omit obsolete provisions 
relating to institutions and frameworks which are no longer in existence; 


(d) to confer upon the Corporation such incidental powers as may be 
necessary for the effective discharge of its functions; 


(e) to enable the Corporation to collect and furnish credit information or 
other information to specified authorities and financial institutions for the 
efficient discharge of its functions; and 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(f) to enable greater flexibility and legal clarity to the Corporation, 
facilitate timely and direct financial assistance for co-operative development 
and to respond effectively to the emerging and diversified requirements of the 
co-operative sector. 


7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 7th August, 2026. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The National Co-operative Development Corporation (Amendment) 
Bill, 2026, if enacted would not involve any expenditure either recurring or 
non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


GORAKHA. Disttally signed by 


GORAKHA NATH 
NATH YADAVA 


Date: 2026.08. 


MGIPMRND—S00GI(S4)—0-08-2026. YADAVA  oo:s37 +0830 


