रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-02062026-273069 
CG-DL-E-02062026-273069 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 20] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, जून 2, 2026/ज्येष्ठ 12, 1948 (शक) 
No. 20] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, JUNE 2, 2026/JYAISHTHA 12, 1948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 2nd June, 2026/Jyaishtha 12, 1948 (Saka) 


THE DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI AND DAMAN AND DIU FIRE 
AND EMERGENCY SERVICE REGULATION, 2026 


No. 6 OF 2026 


Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India. 


A Regulation to provide for the maintenance of a Fire and Emergency Service and to 
make more effective provisions for fire prevention and fire safety measures in 
various categories of buildings and premises in the Union territory of the Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu and the matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution, the 
President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by her:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (/) This Regulation may be called the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
and Diu Fire and Emergency Service Regulation, 2026. 


(2) It extends to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman 
and Diu. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Administrator may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Administrator” means the administrator of the Union territory of the 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu appointed by the President under 
article 239 of the Constitution; 


(b) “Appellate Authority” means an officer of the rank of Assistant 
Director or Assistant Divisional Fire Officer appointed by the Government, by 
notification; 


(c) “building” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in any law 
for the time being in force in the area in which this Regulation is in force and 
includes places or premises comprising of land or building, or part of a land 
or building, whether authorised or otherwise, outhouses, if any, pertaining to 
such building or part thereof and installations of petrol, diesel, gas lines or 
pumps; 


(d) “building bye-laws” means the bye-laws or rules or regulations made 
under any municipal law or any other law for the time being in force in the 
area in which this Regulation is in force and includes the development and 
control rules or regulations, by whatever name called; 


(e) “bye-laws” means the fire safety regulations or norms or guidelines 
made by the Government under this Regulation; 


(f) “Director” means the Director of the Fire and Emergency Service 
appointed under sub-section (/) of section 7; 


(g) “disaster” means the disaster as defined in clause (d) of section 2 of 
the Disaster Management Act, 2005; 


(A) “emergency” means any serious situation or occurrence, including 
disaster, occurring unexpectedly that demands immediate action or response 
of the Fire and Emergency Service; 


(i) “employee” means a person appointed to the Fire and Emergency 
Service; 


() “erector” means a person or association of persons, whether 
incorporated or otherwise, who erects or makes a pandal or any structure for 
occupation of people on a regular or temporary basis; 


(k) “Fire and Emergency Service” means the Dadra and Nagar Haveli 
and Daman and Diu Fire and Emergency Service established under section 3; 


(J) “Fire Officer or Station Fire Officer or Station Officer” means an 
officer appointed as such under sub-section (/) of section 10; 


(m) “fire prevention and life safety measures” means such measures as 
may be necessary for the containment, control and extinguishing of fire and 
for ensuring the safety of life and property, including such other measures as 
may be prescribed; 


(n) “firefighting property” means the land and building used as fire 
stations, firefighting appliances, equipment, tools, implements and other 
articles whatsoever used for firefighting and other means of transport used in 
connection with the firefighting, uniforms and badges of rank; 


(०) “Fire Safety Officer” means the officer appointed as Fire Safety 
Officer under sub-section (/) of section 15; 


53 of 2005. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(p) “fire station” means a fire station established under sub-section (/) 
of section 9; 


(q) “fund” means the Fire Prevention and Life Safety Fund constituted 
under section 39; 


(r) “Government” means the Union territory Administration of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(s) “local authority” means a municipal council, district panchayat or 
gram panchayat constituted under any law for the time being in force; 


(0) “nominated authority” means any officer of the rank of a Station Fire 
Officer or Station Officer of Fire and Emergency Service nominated by the 
Government for the purposes of this Regulation; 


(u) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(v) “occupancy” means the principal occupancy for which a building or 
part thereof is used or intended to be used including subsidiary occupancies 
which are contingent upon it; 


(w) “occupier” means,— 


(i) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land or 
building; 


(ii) any person who, for the time being, is paying or is liable to pay 
to the owner, the rent or any portion of the rent of the land or building in 
respect of which such rent is paid or is payable; 


(iii) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; 


(iv) any person who is liable to pay damages to the owner for the 
use and occupation of any land or building; and 


(v) arent-free tenant of any land or building; 


(x) “Official Gazette” means the Gazette of the Union territory of Dadra 
and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu; 


(v) “owner” means a person who, for the time being, is entitled to receive 
the rent of any land or building, whether on his own account or on account of 
himself and others or as an agent, trustee, guardian or receiver or any other 
person, who may receive the rent or be entitled to receive it, if the land or 
building or part thereof is let out to a tenant; 


(z) “pandal” means a temporary structure with roof or walls made of 
straw, hay, ulu grass, golpatta, hogla, darma, mat, canvas, cloth or such other 
like material which is not used for permanent or continuous occupancy; 


(za) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Government 
under this Regulation; 


(zb) “qualified agency” means a person or an association of persons 
having technical specialisation in the field of Fire or Civil or Mechanical 
Engineering or Technology, Industrial Safety, Disaster Management or 
Chemical Science from a recognised university or institute having domain 
knowledge and accomplishments in the field of fire services or emergency 
services; 


Establishment 
and declaration 
of Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


Superintendence 
of Fire and 
Emergency 
Service to vest 
in Government. 


Composition of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


Terms and 
conditions of 
employees of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(zc) “Second Appellate Authority” means the Director of the Fire and 
Emergency Service; 

(zd) “specified” means specified by an order under this Regulation and 
the expression “specify” shall be construed accordingly; 

(ze) “Standing Fire Advisory Council” means the advisory body 
constituted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, by notification, to examine the 
technical problems relating to a Fire and Emergency Service and to make 
recommendations to the Government of India in the matter including the 
standardisation of firefighting equipment through the Indian Standard 
Institutions; and 

(zf) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman and Diu. 

CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE 

3. (1) With effect from such date as the Government may, by notification, 
appoint, there shall be established a Fire and Emergency Service for the Union 
territory. 

(2) The Government may, by notification, declare any Fire Brigade of the 
Union territory, by whatever name called, as part of the Fire and Emergency 
Service: 

Provided that the private fire and emergency service maintained for providing 


fire protection coverage to a specific building or industry by the owner thereof shall 
not form part of the Fire and Emergency Service. 


(3) In order to assist in any disaster, all fire services shall be considered as 
emergency services. 


(4) In case the emergency service is not related to fire only, the authority 
in-charge of the Fire and Emergency Service shall take action. 


4. The superintendence of, and control over, the Fire and Emergency Service 
throughout the Union territory shall vest in the Government and the Fire and 
Emergency Service shall be administered by the Government in accordance with 
the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder. 


5. (1) The Fire and Emergency Service shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 


(a) Director, ex officio; 

(0) Assistant Director or Assistant Divisional Fire Officer; 
(c) Station Fire Officer or Station Officer (Fire Service); 
(d) Assistant Station Fire Officer or Sub-Officer; 

(e) Leading Fireman; 

(f) Driver-cum-pump operator or Driver operator; 

(g) Fireman; and 

(h) Storekeeper. 


(2) The existing workshop, Control Room and other field formations of the 
Fire and Emergency Service shall function in such manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (J) The number of employees, the method of their recruitment, 
qualifications, level of post, pay, allowances and other conditions of their service 
and the matters connected therewith shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(2) The uniform and badges of employees shall be such as may be prescribed 
and shall be in conformity with the recommendations of the Standing Fire Advisory 
Council. 


(3) The employees of the Fire and Emergency Service shall be governed by 
the Central Civil Services Rules as are applicable to the other employees of the 
Government in relation to the terms and conditions of their service and all other 
allied matters. 


(4) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Regulation, every person 
holding office either as a Fire Officer or staff or an employee of the existing Fire 
Service on the date immediately before the commencement of this Regulation, shall 
continue to hold office on the same terms and conditions as were applicable to him 
immediately before such date and shall exercise such powers and perform such 
duties as before and in addition to those as are conferred on them by or under this 
Regulation. 


(5) All officers and employees of the Fire and Emergency Service shall be 
liable for posting to any branch of the Fire and Emergency Service at any location 
within the Union territory. 


7. (1) The Government may, by notification, appoint a Director of the Fire and 
Emergency Service with such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed, 
who shall exercise such powers and perform such duties and other functions as are 
specified by this Regulation or as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Government may, by notification, appoint such other officers and 
employees, as may be necessary, to assist the Director. 


(3) The jurisdiction of the Director so appointed shall extend to the whole of 
the Union territory in matters relating to Fire and Emergency Service. 


8. (1) The Director shall, subject to the superintendence and control of the 
Government, direct and regulate matters relating to fire safety and prevention, 
firefighting equipment, machinery and appliances, training, events of mutual 
relations, distribution of duties, study of laws, orders and modes of proceedings, 
matters of executive details and the fulfilment of duties and maintenance of 
discipline of fire officers and employees of the Fire and Emergency Service, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder, 
any other applicable rules and instructions applicable to the officers and employees 
of the Union territory. 


(2) The Director shall be the head of the office and shall— 


(a) correspond with the Government for the development of Fire and 
Emergency Service; 


(6) formulate the policies in relation to the development of Fire and 
Emergency Service in the Union territory and, on approval by the 
Government, take steps to implement the same; 


(c) prepare and submit plans and proposals to the Government relating 
to the periodical review of fire equipment, firefighting property and fire 
manpower for effective implementation of the Fire and Emergency Service; 


(d) take or cause to be taken such effective steps and measures in cases 
of major fire, house collapse and other emergency services as deemed 
necessary; 


(e) investigate or direct investigation of the cause of the outbreak of fire 
and advise the concerned authorities in respect of implementation of fire 
precautionary measures; 


Appointment of 
Director of Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Powers, duties 
and functions of 
Director. 


Establishment of 
fire stations. 


Appointment of 
Fire Officer. 


Powers and 
functions of Fire 
Officer. 


Issue of 
certificate to 
employees. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(f) depute such number of officers and employees as may be necessary 
to assist any Fire Officer of the Fire and Emergency Service; 


(g) enter into an agreement, after prior approval of the Government, with 
any person or agency that employs and maintains personnel or equipment or 
both for firefighting purposes, for the purposes of dealing with fires occurring 
in any area; 


(A) implement the effective human resource development policies as per 
the job requirements specified at each level of fire service personnel and for 
that purpose, he may establish advance training centres; 


(i) represent the Government at the national and international forums 
with a view to update the standard of the Fire and Emergency Service in the 
Union territory; and 


(j) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties and 
functions as are conferred or imposed on him by or under this Regulation or 
as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Assistant Director and such other officers, as may be appointed by the 
Government, shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as are conferred 
and imposed upon them, by this Regulation or the rules made thereunder, subject to 
the control, directions and superintendence of the Director. 


CHAPTER III 
ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE STATIONS 


9. (1) The Government may, for the purposes of securing fire prevention and 
life safety measures, by notification, establish as many fire stations and other field 
formations as it deems fit in conformity with the recommendations of the Standing 
Fire Advisory Council and Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation 
and Implementation Guidelines. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall define the limits and 
extent of the fire stations and other field formations as may be necessary for 
administrative and operational efficiency. 


10. (1) The Government may, by notification, appoint a Fire Officer for each 
fire station, who shall be the officer-in-charge of the fire station and shall hold 
charge of the fire station as per the strength of the Fire and Emergency Service as 
may be prescribed by the Government. 


(2) The method of recruitment, qualifications and other terms and conditions 
of service of the Fire Officer shall be such as may be prescribed. 


11. (J) Subject to the control, direction and superintendence of the Director, 
the Fire Officer shall exercise such powers and perform such functions as may be 
conferred upon him under this Regulation and the rules made thereunder. 


(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (/), the Fire Officer 
shall be in-charge of operations of the Fire and Emergency Services within his area 
and shall be responsible for maintenance of communication system, water resources 
including hydrants within his station area, and in the case of fire prevention, disaster 
and emergency, the Fire Officer or an employee senior most in rank, in their 
respective jurisdiction, shall, act as commanding officer for that purpose and other 
Fire and Emergency Service employees shall work under him and abide by his 
direction. 


12. (1) Every employee, appointed to the Fire and Emergency Service, shall 
receive a certificate under the seal and signature of the Director and thereupon such 
person shall have the powers, functions and privileges of an employee of the Fire 
and Emergency Service under this Regulation. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(2) The certificate referred to in sub-section (/) shall cease to have effect when 
the employee named therein ceases for any reason to be an employee and on his 
ceasing to be such employee, he shall forthwith surrender the certificate to any 
officer empowered to receive the same. 


(3) The certificate referred to in sub-section (/) shall become invalid when the 
person named therein ceases to belong to the Fire and Emergency Service or shall 
remain inoperative during the period such person is suspended from the Fire and 
Emergency Service. 


13. (1) Where, it appears to the Government that it is necessary to augment 
the Fire and Emergency Service, it may raise an auxiliary service by enrolment of 
volunteers for such area and on such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every such volunteer shall receive a certificate, in such form as may be 
prescribed, as member of the Fire and Emergency Service, and shall— 


(i) have the same powers and protection; 
(ii) be liable to all such duties and penalties; and 
(iii) be subordinate to the same authorities. 


14. The powers, functions and privileges vested in a Fire Officer shall remain 
suspended while such Fire Officer is placed under suspension: 


Provided that the Fire Officer shall continue to be under the control of same 
authorities during the period of his suspension as he would have been, if he had not 
been, placed under suspension. 


CHAPTER IV 
FIRE SAFETY OFFICER 
15. (J) To ensure effective implementation of fire prevention and life safety 
measures for the factory, buildings or premises as may be specified by an order by 


the Government in this behalf, every owner and occupier or occupiers individually 
or jointly, as the case may be, shall— 


(a) appoint a Fire Safety Officer, within such period, having such 
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed; and 


(6) send the compliance report to the nominated authority. 


(2) The nominated authority shall issue an enrolment certificate to the Fire 
Safety Officer under his signature and seal, in such form as may be prescribed. 


(3) In case of any vacancy of the Fire Safety Officer appointed under 
sub-section (/), either on resignation or otherwise, the owner and occupier or 
occupiers, as the case may be, shall immediately appoint another person as the Fire 
Safety Officer. 


(4) If the Fire Safety Officer referred to in sub-section (3) is not appointed 
within the prescribed period, the nominated authority, may take such steps as it 
deems necessary, including report to the Labour Commissioner for the closure of 
the factory and in other cases to the concerned authority, as the case may be, for 
necessary action under the relevant law. 


(5) The Fire Safety Officer shall undergo such training at the Fire and 
Emergency Service Training Institute as may be specified by the Government in this 
behalf: 


Provided that a person who has already undergone such training at the 
National Fire Service College, Nagpur or at any other equivalent institution 
recognised by the Government for that purpose, shall not be required to undergo 
such training. 


Auxiliary Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Effect of 
suspension of 
Fire Officer. 


Appointment, 
power and 
functions of Fire 
Safety Officer. 


Response to 
calls. 


Deployment of 
personnel and 
equipment. 


Operation 
management. 


Powers of 
employees of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service during 
fire or rescue 
operations. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER V 
FIRE AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE 


16. The Fire Officer shall ensure the timely turnout of fire units to respond to 
fire and emergency related calls in accordance with such Standard Operating 
Procedure as may be specified by the Government. 


17. The Director or Fire Officer shall ensure deployment of Fire and 
Emergency Service resources, equipment and fire personnel at stand-by duties 
during any fire response or any other emergency in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


18. The Director or Fire Officer shall ensure the planning, organising and 
deployment of the staff maintaining details of such planning and deployment of the 
employees and shall ensure the regular monitoring of the fire or emergency site. 


19. In the event of a fire or rescue operation in any area in which this 
Regulation is in force, any member of the Fire and Emergency Service, who is 
in-charge of the firefighting operations on the spot, may— 


(a) remove or order any member of the Fire and Emergency Service to 
remove any person who by his presence interferes with or impedes the 
operation for extinguishing the fire or for saving life or property; 


(6) close any street or passage in or near which a fire is being 
extinguished or rescue work is in progress; 


(c) for the purposes of extinguishing fire and carrying out rescue 
operations, break into or pull down any premises for the passage of hoses or 
appliances or cause them to be broken into or pulled down causing minimum 
damage as possible for the purpose of extinguishing fire: 


Provided that the owner or occupier, as the case may be, of any such 
premises shall be paid such reasonable compensation to the extent of the 
damage caused, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) require any authority in-charge of water supply in the area to regulate 
the water mains so as to provide water at a specified pressure at the place 
where fire has broken out and utilise the water of any stream, cistern, well or 
tank or of any available source of water, public or private, for the purpose of 
extinguishing or limiting the spread of such fire and carrying out rescue 
operations in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(e) exercise the same powers for dispersing an assembly of persons 
likely to obstruct the firefighting operations, as if he were an officer in-charge 
of a police station and as if such an assembly were unlawful assembly and 
shall be entitled to the same immunities and protection as such officer, in 
respect of exercise of such powers; 


(f) detain a person who wilfully obstructs and hinders Fire and 
Emergency Service personnel in firefighting and rescue operations and shall 
hand him over to a police officer or at the nearest police station without any 
delay along with a brief note giving date, time and reasons of such detention; 


(g) enter into an agreement with any person who employs and maintains 
personnel or equipment or both for firefighting purposes, on such terms, as 
may be prescribed for the purposes of dealing with fire occurring in any 
area; and 


(h) take such measures as may appear to him to be necessary for 
extinguishing the fire or for the protection of life and property, or with both. 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


20. The Director or Fire Officer may draw water from any source in the area 
which he considers necessary during firefighting operations and on such occasions 
as may be required and the authority or owner or occupier having control over such 
water source shall supply water for that purpose at such rates, as may be prescribed. 


21. (/) The Director or Fire Officer shall take all reasonable measures for 
securing adequate supply of water for use in the event of fire. 


(2) The Director or Fire Officer shall ensure that the water demand for 
firefighting in the area is in accordance with Central Public Health and 
Environmental Engineering Organisation Manual. 


(3) The Local Authority and the Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu 
Public Works Department shall provide all assistance for meeting the water demand 
for firefighting required under sub-sections (/) and (2). 


22. The Director or Fire Officer may enter into an agreement with any agency 
for meeting demand of water supply in emergency situation on such terms and 
conditions, as may be prescribed. 


23. No authority in charge of water supply in any area shall be entitled to any 
claim for compensation for damage by reason of any interruption of supply of water 
caused in compliance with the provisions of clause (d) of section 19. 


24. No charge shall be made by any local authority for water consumed in 
firefighting operations by the Fire and Emergency Service. 


CHAPTER VI 
PREVENTIVE MEASURES 


25. (1) The Government may, by notification, require the owner or occupier 
of any building or premises in any area or of any class of buildings or premises that 
are likely to be at risk of fire or likely to cause a risk of fire, to take such precautions, 
as may be specified in such notification. 


(2) The Director or Fire Officer shall ensure that provisions for Fire Service 
Management, prevention and preparedness including preparation of Fire Hazard 
Response Mitigation plans are in accordance with the guidelines issued by the 
National Disaster Management Authority. 


26. (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Regulation, the erector of a 
pandal shall take all fire prevention and life safety measures referred to in this section. 


(2) The erector shall display at a prominent place in the pandal, a declaration 
under his signature to the effect that he has taken all fire prevention and life safety 
measures, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The nominated authority may enter and inspect the pandal to verify the 
correctness of the declaration so made under sub-section (2) and in case of any 
default, it may direct the erector to rectify the same within the specified time and in 
case of non-compliance of directions within the specified time, shall remove the 
pandal in such manner as may be prescribed. 


27. If any erector falsely declares that he has complied with the prescribed fire 
prevention and life safety measures in the pandal under sub-section (2) of section 26, 
he shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable under section 49. 


28. (1) Where a notification has been issued under sub-section (/) of 
section 25, it shall be lawful for the nominated authority to issue directions to the 
owner or occupier or erector, as the case may be, for removal of the objects, goods 
or encroachment, if any, that are likely to cause fire or any obstruction to firefighting 
to a place of safety, by means of a notice served in such manner as he may think fit. 


Power to arrange 
for water supply 
during 
emergency. 


Duty of Director 
or Fire Officer to 
arrange water 


supply. 


Power to enter 
into agreement 
for water supply. 


Authority not to 
claim 
compensation 
for damage. 


Local authority 
not to charge for 
water 
consumption. 


Preventive 
measures. 


Erector ofa 
pandal to take 
fire prevention 
and life safety 
measures. 


False declaration 
to be punishable 
offence. 


Removal of 
encroachment or 
objects or goods 
likely to cause a 
risk of fire or 
any obstruction 
to firefighting. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) If the owner, occupier or erector, as the case may be, fails to comply with 
the precautions under sub-section (/) of section 25 or directions under 
sub-section (3) of section 26, the nominated authority may, report the matter to the 
Sub-divisional Magistrate, in whose territorial jurisdiction the premises or building 
or pandal is situated, for adjudication. 


(3) Where the nominated authority considers objects or goods or 
encroachment referred to in sub-section (/) to be an imminent cause of risk of fire 
or obstruction to firefighting, he may seize or remove the objects or goods or 
encroachment forthwith and report the matter to the Sub-divisional Magistrate. 


(4) On receipt of a report under sub-section (2) or (3), the Sub-divisional 
Magistrate shall issue a notice to the owner or occupier or erector, as the case may 
be, in such manner as he may think fit, giving such owner or occupier or erector, an 
opportunity for making representation against the removal of encroachment or 
objects or goods likely to cause a risk of fire or obstruction to firefighting. 


(5) After giving the owner, occupier or erector, as the case may be, a 
reasonable opportunity of making representation under sub-section (4), the 
Sub-divisional Magistrate after considering the representation, may withdraw the 
notice or pass an order directing any person to seize, detain or remove such objects 
or goods or encroachment within such time from the date of order. 


(6) The person charged with the directions under sub-section (5) shall, make 
an inventory of the objects and goods that are seized under such order and give 
notice in such form as may be prescribed, to the person in possession thereof at the 
time of seizure, that the said objects or goods shall be sold if the same are not 
claimed within the period stipulated in the said notice and inform the Sub-divisional 
Magistrate about the seizure. 


(7) If the person from whom the objects and goods were seized under 
sub-section (5) fails to claim the seized objects and goods pursuant to notice given 
under sub-section (6), the Sub-divisional Magistrate may sell such objects and goods 
by public auction. 


Liability of 29. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the bye-laws and any other law 
owner or for the time being in force in the Union territory, the owner or occupier, who are 
paige either individually or jointly responsible for a building or part thereof, shall provide 
provide fire fire prevention and life safety measures as may be prescribed: 

tion and : | 
life safety. - Provided that the owner or occupier, as the case may be, shall— 


oe (a) provide firefighting and life safety installations or measures as 


provided in such bye-law; 


(8) maintain the fire prevention and life safety measures in operational 
condition at all times, in the same manner and specifications as specified in 
such bye-law. 


(2) Any person proposing to construct a building as mentioned in clauses (a) 
and (4) or pursuant to the rules made in this behalf, shall apply for approval of the 
fire and life safety measures along with the building plan to the nominated authority 
in this behalf, in such form along with such fee, as may be prescribed, in case of,— 


(a) multi-storied buildings having more than fifteen metre height; 
(5) special buildings including,— 


(i) hotels or resorts or eating houses, apartments exceeding five 
hundred square metres of floor area on addition of the area of all floors, 
educational institutions, buildings for assembly, business or mercantile 
buildings, industries or factories, buildings for storage, godowns or 
buildings used for storage of hazardous materials; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


(ii) mixed occupancies, where any of the above buildings have a 
floor area of more than five hundred square metres on addition of area 
of all floors. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force in the Union territory, no authority shall grant or issue electricity or water 
connections or an occupancy certificate, in respect of any building or premises, 
unless the owner or occupier thereof has obtained a Fire Safety Certificate in 
accordance with the provisions of this Regulation: 


Provided that the owner or occupier of the building referred to in 
sub-section (2) shall, prior to the grant of building plan approval, obtain a 
Provisional Fire Safety Certificate, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, 
and shall, prior to the grant of a completion certificate, obtain a Fire Safety 
Certificate from the nominated authority. 


(4) Without prejudice to the existing building bye-laws, the owner or occupier 
of the buildings specified in sub-section (2) and the notification issued under 
sub-section (/) of section 25 shall obtain a Fire Safety Certificate from the Fire and 
Emergency Service which shall be valid for five years, unless cancelled earlier by 
the nominated authority, from the date of issue of such certificate: 


Provided that after the expiry of a period of thirty months from the date 
of issue of the Fire Safety Certificate, the owner or occupier, as the case may be, 
shall submit to the nominated authority a self-declaration or certification, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed, relating to the operational fitness and 
adequacy of the fire safety equipment and firefighting system installed in 
the premises. 


(5) While applying for the Fire Safety Certificate, the owner or occupier, as 
the case may be, shall furnish to the nominated authority, a certificate certifying the 
compliance of the fire prevention and life safety measures in his building or part 
thereof, issued by a qualified agency, in such form as may be prescribed. 


(6) The owner or occupier, as the case may be, after receipt of the Fire Safety 
Certificate shall furnish a declaration, in such form as may be prescribed, once a 
year in the month of July, regarding the efficient maintenance of fire prevention and 
life safety measures as mentioned in sub-section (/). 


(7) No person other than the qualified agency shall carry out the work of 
providing fire prevention and life safety measures or performing such other related 
activities required to be carried out in any place or building or part thereof. 


(8) For the purposes of this section, the manner of selecting the qualified 
agency, and the functions of such qualified agency, shall be such, as may be 
prescribed. 


30. (1) The nominated authority shall, upon receipt of an application, Issue of Fire 
scrutinise the compliances required under section 29 and other provisions of this Safety 
5 है & Certificate and 
Regulation, the documents and particulars submitted by the owner or occupier, and कपल लक, 
after following such procedure, as may be prescribed and after making such 
verification as may be necessary, issue a Fire Safety Certificate within a period of 
thirty days from the date of receipt of the application. 


(2) If the owner or occupier, as the case may be, fails to comply with the 
directions issued by the Fire Officer, the Fire Safety Certificate, issued under 
sub-section (/), shall be cancelled after giving the owner or occupier a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


(3) The owner or occupier of the building, whose Fire Safety Certificate 
has been cancelled under sub-section (2), shall not be entitled to occupy the 
building. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(4) No person shall tamper with, alter, remove or cause any injury or damage 
to any fire prevention and life safety equipment installed in any such building or 
part thereof or instigate any other person to do so. 


Power of 31. (J) The nominated authority may, after giving three hours’ notice to the 

inspection by occupier, or if there is no occupier, to the owner of any place or building or part 

nominated : outa tt हि 

anikority, thereof, enter and inspect such place or building or part thereof, at any time between 
sunrise and sunset, where such inspection appears necessary to ascertain the 
adequacy of fire prevention and life safety measures or the contravention thereof: 


Provided that the nominated authority may enter and inspect any place or 
building, at any time, if an industry is operating or an entertainment programme is 
going on in such place or building, if it appears to him to be necessary and expedient 
so to do, in order to ensure safety of life and property. 


(2) The owner or occupier, as the case may be, of such place or building or 
part thereof shall provide all possible assistance to the nominated authority for 
carrying out the inspection under sub-section (/). 


(3) The owner or occupier or any other person shall not obstruct or cause any 
obstruction to the entry, of a person empowered under this section, into or upon such 
place or building. 


(4) When any such place or building or part thereof referred to in 
sub-section (/) is being used as a human dwelling and is entered, due regard shall 
be paid to the social and religious sentiments of the occupier, and where any flat, 
apartment, place or building or part thereof is in the actual occupancy of a woman, 
who, according to the custom does not appear in public, prior notice intimating her 
that she is at liberty to withdraw from such place or building, and every reasonable 
facility for such withdrawal shall be given to her. 


(5) Where the inspection is carried out by the nominated authority under 
sub-section (/), it shall give a report of such inspection to the Director. 


(6) The nominated authority shall, after completion of the inspection under 
this section, record its views on the deviations from or the contraventions of the 
requirements with regard to fire prevention and life safety measures or the 
inadequacy or non-compliance of such measures provided or to be provided therein 
with reference to the height of the building or the nature of activities carried on in 
such place or building or part thereof and issue a notice to the owner or occupier of 
such place or building directing him to undertake such measures within such period 
as may be specified in the notice. 


Communication 32. Any person who possesses any information regarding an outbreak of fire 


of information shall communicate the same without delay to the nearest fire station. 
on outbreak of 


fire. 
CHAPTER VII 
FIRE AND EMERGENCY SERVICE TRAINING INSTITUTE 
Establishment of 33. The Government may,— 


Fire and 
Emergency (a) establish and maintain one or more training institutes in the Union 


Training territory for providing courses of instruction in the prevention and 

Institute. : ५ : पु 
extinguishment of fire for the fire and emergency service personnel, private 
candidates and other Government or non-Government establishments and may 
close down or re-establish any such training centre in accordance with 
recommendations of the Standing Fire Advisory Council; 


(6) extend the training facilities referred to in clause (a) and provide 
training in specialised courses to private candidates or organisations as well as 
the Fire and Emergency Service of other States on payment of such charges, 
as may be prescribed; 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(c) provide a course of instruction on prevention and extinguishment of 
fire in accordance with such procedure and on payment of such fee as may 
be prescribed; 


(d) subject to the observance of any rules applicable to other employees 
of the Government in relation to training, the employees of the Fire and 
Emergency Service may be given training in the field of scientific and modern 
techniques of fire protection and fire safety measures, and allied matters in 
any institute, within or outside India, at the cost and expense of the 
Government. 


34. The Director or Fire Officer shall conduct community awareness and 
training programmes on preventive measures relating to fire and other emergencies 
and the Fire and Emergency Service shall render assistance and consultation to the 
communities in such matters relating to fire prevention in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


CHAPTER शा 
LEVY OF FIRE TAX AND OTHER CHARGES 


35. (J) There shall be levied a fire tax on lands and buildings on 
which property tax, by whatever name called, is levied by any local authority in 
that area. 


(2) The fire tax shall be levied over and above the property tax at such rates as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) No tax shall be levied on any building vested in or under the control or 
possession of the Government or public authority owned by the Government. 


36. (1) The authority empowered to assess, collect and enforce payment of 
property tax under the law authorising the local authority of the area to levy such 
tax shall, on behalf of the Government and subject to any rules made under this 
Regulation, assess, collect and enforce payment of the fire tax in the same manner 
as the property tax is assessed, enforced or collected. 


(2) Such portion of the total proceeds of the fire tax as the Government may 
determine shall be deducted to meet the cost of collection of the fire tax. 


37. (1) Where employees of the Fire and Emergency Service are deployed 
beyond the limits of any area under this Regulation, in order to extinguish a fire in 
the neighbourhood of such limits, then the State Government or the local body or 
the Fire and Emergency Service authority on whose request they were sent, shall be 
liable to pay such fee as may be prescribed. 


(2) The fee referred to in sub-section (/) shall be payable within a period of 
one month from the date of service of notice of demand by the Director or Fire 
Officer and in case of non-payment within the said period, it shall be recoverable as 
an arrear of land revenue. 


(3) No fee shall be levied for extinguishing the fire and carrying out rescue 
operations within the Union territory. 


(4) Where employees of the Fire and Emergency Service are deployed for the 
purposes other than firefighting within the Union territory on the direction of the 
Director or Fire Officer for rendering special services such as attending duties of 
fire protection at large assemblies or gatherings along with firefighting equipment 
for stand-by duty, subject to safe use of equipment, if it can be spared or for 
imparting fire safety training on the written request of any person, shall be liable to 
pay such fee, in advance, as may be prescribed. 


38. Any amount payable under this Regulation in any form shall be recovered 
as an arrear of land revenue. 


Community 
preparedness. 


Levy of fire tax. 


Mode of 
assessment, 
collection and 
levy of fire tax. 


Fee on 
deployment of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service within or 
beyond limits of 
Union territory. 


Recovery of 
dues. 


Constitution of 
fund. 


Requisition of 
firefighting 
property. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
certain 
provisions of 
Regulation. 


Penalty for 
violation of 
duty. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER IX 
FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY FUND 


39. (1) The Government may, by notification, constitute a fund to be called 
the Fire Prevention and Life Safety Fund. 


(2) The proceeds of fire tax, fee and penalties other than fines recovered under 
this Regulation, shall be credited to the said Fund after deduction of the expenses of 
collection and recovery therefrom. 


(3) The Fund shall be utilised for the purposes of fire community 
preparedness, training and procurement of firefighting equipment, subject to such 
conditions and in such manner, as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER X 
REQUISITIONING OF FIREFIGHTING PROPERTY 


40. (/) The Director or Fire Officer who is in-charge of a firefighting operation 
may, if in his opinion it is necessary for the purpose of extinguishing fire in any 
area, requisition and take possession of any firefighting property in the possession 
of any local authority or any institution or individual. 


(2) As soon as the firefighting operations are over, the Director or Fire Officer 
in-charge of the firefighting operation, as the case may be, shall release the property 
referred to in sub-section (/) from requisition and restore the same to the local 
authority, institution or individual from whose possession such property was taken. 


(3) Where any firefighting property is requisitioned under sub-section (/), the 
owner of such property shall be paid compensation which shall be determined in 
accordance with the following principles, namely:— 


(a) where the amount of compensation is fixed by an agreement between 
the Director or Fire Officer and the owner of the firefighting property, it shall 
be paid in accordance with such agreement; or 


(0) where the parties fail to reach an agreement under clause (a), the 
Director or Fire Officer, who is in-charge of firefighting operation, shall refer 
the matter to the Sub-divisional Magistrate having jurisdiction over the area 
in which the firefighting property was kept and the Magistrate shall after 
hearing the parties and such other persons as he deems necessary, determine 
the amount of compensation taking into consideration the rent payable for 
such firefighting property and such order of the Magistrate determining the 
amount of compensation shall be final. 


CHAPTER XI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
41. Whoever contravenes any provisions of sections 20 to 24 of this 
Regulation or the rules made thereunder, shall, without prejudice to any other action 
taken against him under this Regulation or rules made thereunder, be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both, and where the offence is a 


continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to three thousand rupees for 
every day after the first day during which such offence continues. 


42. Notwithstanding any action which may be taken under the provisions of 
this Regulation, any member of the Fire and Emergency Service who,— 


(a) is found to be guilty of any violation of duty or wilful breach of any 
provision of this Regulation or any rule or order made thereunder; or 


(8) is found to be guilty of abdication of duty; or 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(c) withdraws or abstains from the duties of his office without 
permission or without having given prior notice of fifteen days or more; or 


(d) being on leave fails without reasonable cause to report himself for 
duty on the expiration of such leave; or 


(e) accepts any other employment or office or engages himself in 
business in contravention of the provisions of the Central Civil Services 
(Conduct) Rules, 1964, 


shall be liable under the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) 
Rules, 1965. 


43. (1) If any owner or occupier or an association of such owners and 
occupiers of a building or premises fails to appoint a Fire Safety Officer referred to 
in section 15, within the period as may be prescribed, on the receipt ofa notice given 
in this behalf by the nominated authority or the Fire Officer, as the case may be, 
each one of them shall be deemed to be in default jointly and severally. 


(2) If the person referred to in sub-section (/) is deemed to be in default, he 
shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than ten rupees and more than 
fifty rupees per square metre of area owned or occupied by him including the 
common areas in the premises as determined by the Government, which shall be 
recovered from him by way of penalty for each month of default or part thereof. 


(3) The amount referred to in sub-section (2) shall be recovered as an arrear 
of land revenue. 


44. (J) Any person whose property catches fire on account of his own act or 
of his agent, done deliberately or negligently, shall be liable to pay compensation to 
any other person suffering damage to his property on account of any action taken 
under section 18 by any officer mentioned therein or any person acting under the 
authority of such officer. 


(2) All claims under sub-section (/) shall be referred to the Appellate 
Authority within a period of thirty days from the date on which damage 
was caused. 


(3) The Appellate Authority, shall, after giving the party an opportunity of 
being heard, determine the amount of compensation and pass an order fixing the 
liability of the person for such default and the amount of compensation to be paid 
by him. 


(4) The order passed under sub-section (3) shall have the force of decree of a 
civil court and shall be implemented within thirty days from the date of receipt of 
the order. 


45. Any person, legally bound to communicate information in his possession 
regarding an outbreak of fire, fails to communicate the said information, without 
reasonable justification, shall be deemed to have committed an offence punishable 
under clause (a) of section 211 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


46. Whoever fails, without reasonable cause, to comply with any of the 
requirements specified in the notification issued under sub-section (/) of section 25, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months 
or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both and where the 
offence is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees for each day after the first day during which such offence continues. 


47. Any person, who wilfully obstructs or interferes with any member of the 
Fire and Emergency Service while discharging his duty, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both. 


Penalty in case of 
non-appointment 
of Fire Safety 
Officers. 


Liability of 
property owner 
to pay 
compensation. 


Failure to give 
information. 


Punishment for 
failure to take 
precautions. 


Penalty for 
wilfully 
obstructing 
firefighting, 
rescue 
operations. 


Penalty for 
giving false 
report. 


Punishment for 
furnishing false 
certificate. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
provisions of 
Regulation, 
where no 
punishment has 
been provided. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Compounding of 
offences. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


48. Any person who knowingly gives or causes to be given a false report of 
the outbreak of a fire to any person authorised to receive such report, by means of a 
statement, message or otherwise, shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees. 


49. Ifany qualified agency referred to in sub-section (5) of section 29 furnishes 
false certificate or declaration that maintenance of fire prevention and life safety 
measures as specified in sub-section (/) of section 25 or as required under 
sub-section (2) of section 26 have been complied, every person who, at the time the 
offence was committed, was in-charge of, and responsible for the agency and the 
conduct of the business of the agency, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and liable for punishment: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without 
his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 


50. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Regulation or of any rule made 
or notification issued thereunder, for which no punishment or penalty has been 
provided shall, without prejudice to any other action taken against him under this 
Regulation or the rules made thereunder, be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
ten thousand rupees and where the contravention is a continuing one, with a further 
penalty which may extend to one thousand rupees for every day after the first day 
during which such contravention continues. 


51. (J) Where an offence under this Regulation has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in-charge 
of, and responsible for the company and the conduct of the business of the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render such person 
liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence, to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where any offence 
under this Regulation has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, 
any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(0) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


52. (1) Any offence whether committed before or after the commencement of 
this Regulation, punishable under sections 44 and 45 or any rule made thereunder, 
may before the institution of prosecution, be compounded by such officers of the 
Fire and Emergency Service and for such amount as the Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf: 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


Provided that no offence shall be compoundable which is committed by failure 
to comply with a notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the 
Government or of any of the officers authorised under this Regulation and until the 
same has been complied with. 


(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section (/), the 
offender if in custody, shall be discharged and no further action shall be taken 
against him in respect of such offence. 


53. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person 
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Regulation or any rules made thereunder. 


54. No court shall take the cognizance of an offence under this Regulation, 
except on the complaint of, or upon information received from, the Director or the 
officer authorised by him. 


55. No court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try 
an offence punishable under this Regulation. 


CHAPTER XII 
APPEALS 


56. (/) Any person aggrieved by any notice or order of the nominated authority 
issued or made under this Regulation may prefer an appeal to the Appellate 
Authority within a period of thirty days from the date of the order appealed against: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry 
of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that there was sufficient ground for 
not filing such appeal within the said period. 


(2) An appeal under sub-section (/) shall be made in such form and manner 
and shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice or order appealed against and on 
payment of such fees, as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Appellate Authority may prefer 
an appeal before the Second Appellate Authority, within a period of thirty days from 
the date of order, and the decision of the Second Appellate Authority thereon shall 
be final and binding on the parties. 


CHAPTER XIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


57. The Director may, in the public interest, with the prior approval of the 
Government, enter into an agreement with any Fire and Emergency Service or the 
authority which maintains the said Fire and Emergency Service, beyond the limits 
of any area in which this Regulation is in force for providing personnel or equipment 
or both, for firefighting purposes, on reciprocal basis, on such terms and conditions 
as may be specified in the said agreement. 


58. Without prejudice to the provisions of any other law for the time being in 
force, the Government may, by notification, declare the Fire and Emergency Service 
as technical service. 


59. The Director or any Fire Officer authorised by the Government in this 
behalf may, in the event of a fire or other emergency in any neighbouring area in 
which this Regulation does not extend, order the deployment of the employees of 
the Fire and Emergency Service with necessary appliances and equipment to carry 
out firefighting operations in such neighbouring area and thereupon all the 
provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder shall apply to such 
areas, during the period of fire emergency or during such period as the Director may 
specify, on such charges as may be prescribed. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Cognizance of 
offence. 


Jurisdiction. 


Appeals. 


Firefighting 
arrangements 
with other Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Declaration of 
Fire and 
Emergency 
Service as 
technical service. 


Deployment in 
other area. 


Deployment on 
other duties. 


Power to obtain 
information. 


Power to 
disconnect 
electricity and 
water supply or 
seal buildings. 


Penalty for 
removal of seal. 


Police officers 
and employees 
to assist and aid. 


Existing Fire and 
Emergency 
Service deemed 
to be Fire and 
Emergency 
Service 
constituted 
under 
Regulation. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


60. The Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, may deploy 
the Fire and Emergency Service in any rescue, salvage or other operation for which 
it is suitable by reason of its training, appliances and equipment. 


61. The Director or an employee of the Fire and Emergency Service, 
authorised by general or special order in this behalf may, for the purpose of 
discharging his duties under this Regulation, may by order require the owner or 
occupier of any building or other property, to supply such information with respect 
to the features of such building or other property as may be specified therein, the 
available water supplies and means of access thereto and any other material 
particulars, and such owner or occupier shall furnish all the information in his 
possession to the Director or such employee. 


62. (1) Where, it appears to the Director either suo motu or on receipt of a 
report from the nominated authority referred to in sub-section (5) of section 31, that 
the condition of any building is dangerous to life or property, he shall, without 
prejudice to any action taken under this Regulation, by order, require the person in 
possession or occupation of such building to remove themselves from such building 
or premises immediately. 


(2) If an order made by the Director under sub-section (/) is not complied 
with, the Director may direct,— 


(a) the authority concerned to disconnect the supply of electricity or 
water, as the case may be, in the building referred to in sub-section (/); 


(6) any police officer having jurisdiction in such area to remove such 
persons from the building and such officer shall comply with such directions. 


(3) After the removal of the persons referred to in sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (2), as the case may be, the nominated authority shall declare the 
building unfit from fire safety point of view and shall report immediately to the 
concerned Sub-divisional Magistrate, who shall seal the building or the premises 
immediately, with the aid of police assistance, if necessary. 


(4) No person shall remove such seal except under an order made by the 
Sub-divisional Magistrate. 


63. Any person, who removes the seal, referred to in sub-section (3) of 
section 62 except under an order made by the Sub-divisional Magistrate, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with 
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both. 


64. In firefighting operations or any other duties relating to seizure, detention 
or removal of any goods involving risk of fire, disconnection of electricity, water 
supply or sealing of building, it shall be the duty ofa police officer or employees of 
the police force to assist and aid the nominated authority in performance of such 
duties under this Regulation. 


65. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, on and from the date of the commencement of this Regulation, 
the existing Fire and Emergency Service of the Union territory shall be deemed to 
be the Fire and Emergency Service constituted under this Regulation; and every 
person holding the office of Fire Officer or an employee of such service in the Union 
territory, on and before the promulgation of this Regulation, shall be deemed to have 
been appointed and hold office under this Regulation. 


(2) All proceedings pending before any Fire Officer of the existing Union 
territory Fire and Emergency Service, immediately before the commencement of 
this Regulation shall be deemed to be proceedings pending before him under this 
Regulation. 


45 of 2023. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


66. In the event of death of a member of the Fire and Emergency Service other 
than a Gazetted Officer, while on duty, the Government shall immediately pay to 
the next of kin of the said member as funeral expenses, such amount as may be 
prescribed or such amount as the Government may by an order determine. 


67. Every officer and employee of the Fire and Emergency Service, acting 
under this Regulation, shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of 
clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


68. The Government may call for any returns, reports and records relating to 
fire prevention and fire safety, the maintenance of order and the performance of 
duties by the Director, nominated authority, Fire Officer, employees or subordinate 
operational staff, and the same shall be furnished immediately. 


69. (1) The Government may, by notification and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with provisions of this Regulation 
for carrying out the purposes of this Regulation. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 


(a) other measures under clause (m) of section 2; 


(6) the manner of function of existing workshop, Control Room and 
other field formations under sub-section (2) of section 5; 


(c) the number of employees, method of recruitment, level of post, 
qualifications, pay, allowances, terms and conditions of service of employees 
of Fire and Emergency Service and the other matters connected therewith 
under sub-section (/) of section 6; 


(d) the uniform and badges of employees under sub-section (2) of 
section 6; 


(e) qualifications and experience and powers, duties and other functions 
of Director under sub-section (/) of section 7; 


(f) other powers, duties and functions of Director under clause () of 
sub-section (2) of section 8; 


(g) the strength of the Fire and Emergency Service under sub-section (/) 
of section 10; 


(h) the method of recruitment, qualifications and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Fire Officer under sub-section (2) of section 10; 


(i) the auxiliary service, the area and the terms and conditions under 
sub-section (/) of section 13; 


(j) the form of certificate under sub-section (2) of section 13; 


(k) the qualifications and experience of the Fire Safety Officer, under 
clause (a) of sub-section (/), the form of enrolment certificate under 
sub-section (2), the period within which the Fire Safety Officer is appointed 
under sub-section (4), of section 15; 


(2) the manner of deployment of the Fire and Emergency Service 
resources, equipment and fire personnel at stand-by duties during any fire 
response or any other emergency under section 17; 


(m) the compensation payable and the manner thereof under clause (c), 
the manner of extinguishing or limiting the spread of fire and carrying out 
rescue operations under clause (d) and the terms of an agreement under 
clause (g), of section 19; 


(n) the rates payable for supplying water under section 20; 


Funeral expenses 
to next of kin in 
case of death of 
member of Fire 
and Emergency 
Service. 


Officers and 
employees to be 
public servants. 


Power of 
Government to 
call for returns, 
reports, 
statements, etc. 


Power to make 
rules. 


Power of 
Government to 
delegate. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(०) the terms and conditions under section 22; 


(p) the fire prevention and life safety measures and the manner of 
displaying the declaration under sub-section (2) and the manner of removing 
the pandal under sub-section (3), of section 26; 


(q) the form of notice under sub-section (6) of section 28; 


(r) the fire prevention and life safety measures under sub-section (/), the 
form and the fee under sub-section (2), form and manner of obtaining a 
Provisional Fire Safety Certificate under sub-section (3), the form and manner 
of self-declaration or certification under sub-section (4), form of certificate to 
be issued by qualified agency under sub-section (5), the form of declaration 
under sub-section (6) and the manner of selecting the qualified agency and 
functions thereof under sub-section (8), of section 29; 


(s) the procedure under sub-section (/) of section 30; 


(0) the charges payable under clause (0), the procedure and fee payable 
for course of instruction on prevention and extinguishment of fire under 
clause (c), of section 33; 


(u) the matters in respect of which the Fire and Emergency Service shall 
render assistance and consultation to the communities and the manner thereof 
under section 34; 


(v) the rate of fire tax to be levied under sub-section (2) of section 35; 


(w) the fee payable by the State Government or the local body or the Fire 
and Emergency Service authority under sub-section (/) and the fee payable 
under sub-section (4) of section 37; 


(x) the conditions and the manner of utilisation of fund under 
sub-section (3) of section 39; 


(v) the time period for appointment of Fire Safety Officer under 
sub-section (/) of section 43; 


(z) the form and manner and fees payable under sub-section (2) of 
section 56; 


(za) the charges payable under section 59; 
(zb) amount payable under section 66. 


70. (1) The Government may, by notification, direct that any power 
exercisable by it under this Regulation shall, subject to such conditions, if any, be 
exercisable by any officer not below the rank of Secretary to the Government. 


(2) The Director may, by order, direct that any power conferred or any duty 
imposed on him by or under this Regulation shall, in such circumstances and under 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised and, performed 
by any officer of the Fire and Emergency Service specified in the said order. 


71. (J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Regulation, the Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation as may 
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from 
the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


9 of 1986. 


10 of 1897. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


72. Every rule and every order made under this Regulation shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


73. (1) The provisions of this Regulation and the rules made thereunder shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other 
law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any 
other law. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, when anything in relation to the fire prevention and life safety measures is 
required to be done or approved under this Regulation, any such thing shall not be 
deemed to have been unlawfully done or approved by reason only of the fact that 
the permission, approval or sanction required under such other law has not been 
obtained. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (/), the provisions of this 
Regulation shall be in addition to, and not, save as expressly provided hereinabove, 
be in derogation of the provisions of any relevant law for the time being in force in 
any area in which this Regulation is in force. 


74. (1) The Goa, Daman and Diu Fire Force Act, 1986 as applied to erstwhile 
Union territory of Daman and Diu and as extended to erstwhile Union territory of 
Dadra and Nagar Haveli is hereby repealed: 


Provided that such repeal shall not be deemed to limit, modify or derogate 
from the general responsibility of any local authority,— 


(i) to provide and maintain such water supply and fire hydrants for 
firefighting purposes as may be directed by the Government from time to time; 


(ii) to make bye-laws for the regulation of dangerous trades; 


(iii) to order any of its employees to render aid in fighting a fire when 
reasonably called upon to do so by any member of the fire service; and 


(iv) generally, to take such measures as will reduce the likelihood of fire 
or prevent the spread of fire. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or 
purported to have been done or taken including any rule made or any direction given, 
or any proceedings conducted or any penalty or fine imposed under the Regulation 
so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Regulation, be deemed to have been done, taken or conducted under the 
corresponding provisions of this Regulation. 


(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


Laying of rules 
and orders, etc. 


Act to have 
overriding effect 
on other laws. 


Repeal and 
saving. 


MGIPMRND—283 GI—02.06.2026 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


GORAKH Dstaly Janes 

ANATH _ Natiivanava 
Date 

YADAVA jesro4 0930" 


