रजिस्ट्री सं" Sto Weie—(WA)04/0007/2003—25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-12032025-261583 
CG-DL-E-12032025-261583 


भाग वा -- खण्ड 2 
PART 1 — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 09] नई दिल्‍ली, मंगलवार, मार्च 11, 2025/ फाल्गुन 20, 1946 (शक) 
No. 09] NEW DELHI, TUESDAY, MARCH 11, 2025/PHALGUNA 20, 1946 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 11th March, 2025:— 
Bit No. 22 oF 2025 


A Bill to confer upon the Central Government certain powers to provide for requirement 
of passports or other travel documents in respect of persons entering into and 
exiting from India and for regulating matters related to foreigners including 
requirement of visa and registration and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. () This Act may be called the Immigration and Foreigners Act, 2025. Short title 
and 
commence- 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


ment. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “accommodation” means a temporary or permanent premises of any 
nature, where a foreigner is accommodated; 


(b) “carrier” means a person or entity, including any association of 
persons or company, whether incorporated or not, who is engaged in the 
business of transporting passengers or cargo by air, water or land by aircraft 
or ship or any other mode of transport; 


(c) “civil authority” means such authority as may be appointed by the 
Central Government in this behalf for such area as it thinks fit; 


(d) “entry” means entry by air, water or land; 
(e) “exit” means exit by air, water or land; 
(f) “foreigner” means a person who is not a citizen of India; 
(g) “immigration function” means any one of the functions relating to— 
(i) the visa issuance and regulation of entry into; 
(ii) transit through; 
(iii) stay 1n; or 
(iv) movement within and exit from, 


India, under the provisions of this Act or rules or orders or directions made 
thereunder; 


(A) “Immigration Officer” means any officer authorised by the Central 
Government to carry out immigration functions or such other functions as may 
be prescribed and includes the Chief Immigration Officer; 


(7) “immigration post” means the point of entry into and exit from India 
for the purpose of immigration functions as may be notified by the Central 
Government; 


(j) “keeper of accommodation” means the person in charge of the 
management of an accommodation and includes any person authorised by him 
to perform the duties of the keeper of the accommodation; 


(k) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the expressions “notify” and “notified” shall be construed accordingly; 


(J) “order” means the instructions issued under any of the provisions of 
this Act or the rules made thereunder; 


(m) “other travel document” means the Emergency Certificate or 
Certificate of Identity or such other travel document which has been issued by 
or under the authority of the Central Government or Government of a foreign 
country or any other organisation as may be recognised for this purpose by the 
Central Government, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; 


(n) “passport” means a passport issued or deemed to have been issued 
under the provisions of the Passport Act, 1967 and includes a passport which 
have been issued by or under the authority of the Government of a foreign 
country subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; 


(०) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(p) “Prohibited place” means any place as the Central Government may, 
by order, specify in this behalf; 


15 of 1967. 


15 of 1967. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


(q) “Protected area” means any area contiguous with India’s 
international border or any other area, as the Central Government may, by 
order, specify in this behalf; 


(r) “Registration Officer’ means a Registration Officer authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf for such area as it thinks fit and includes 
such officer authorised by him with the approval of the Central Government 
to perform the duties of the Registration Officer on his behalf; 


(s) “Restricted area” means any area within India and outside the 
protected area, as the Central Government may, by order, specify in this 
behalf; 


(0) “visa” means an authorisation by such authority as may be prescribed 
in this behalf, permitting a foreigner to enter into or transit through or stay in 
or exit from the territory of India. 


CHAPTER II 
MATTERS RELATED TO IMMIGRATION 


3. (1) No person proceeding from any place outside India shall enter, or 
attempt to enter, India by air, water or land unless he is in possession of a valid 
passport or other travel document, and in case of a foreigner, also a valid visa, and 
any foreigner while present in India shall also be required to possess valid passport 
or other valid travel document and valid visa, unless exempted under section 33 or 
through intergovernmental agreements: 


Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, no 
foreigner shall be allowed to enter into or stay in India, if he is found inadmissible 
to do so on account of threat to national security, sovereignty and integrity of India, 
relations with a foreign State or public health or on such other grounds as the Central 
Government may, specify in this behalf: 


Provided further that the decision of the Immigration Officer in this regard 
shall be final and binding. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 of the Passports 
Act, 1967, no person shall depart or attempt to depart from India by air, water or 
land unless he is in possession of a valid passport or other travel document and in 
case of a foreigner, also a valid visa: 


Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this sub-section, no 
person shall be allowed to depart or exit from India, if his presence is required in 
India by any authorised agency or on such grounds as the Central Government may, 
by order, specify in this behalf: 


Provided further that the decision of the Immigration Officer in this regard 
shall be final and binding. 


(3) The Immigration Officer may examine the passport or other travel 
document and visa of a foreigner during his entry into, transit through, stay in, 
movement within India and also require him to furnish such information as may be 
necessary and appropriate. 


(4) The Immigration Officer may seize a passport or other travel document of 
any person which has been declared as lost or stolen or considered as damaged or 
forged or fraudulently obtained or on the direction of the passport issuing authority 
or courts. 


(5) The overall supervision, direction and control on visa and related matters 
shall vest in and be exercised by the Central Government. 


Requirement of 

passport or other 
travel document 

and visa. 


Immigration 
posts for entry or 
exit. 


Bureau of 
Immigration. 


Registration of 
foreigners. 


Power to issue 
orders, 
directions or 
instructions. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


4. (1) The Central Government may notify the designated immigration posts 
for entry into or exit from India at such places as may be specified. 


(2) A designated immigration post for entry into or exit from India shall be 
manned by an Immigration Officer or such other officers as may be specified by the 
Bureau of Immigration constituted under section 5. 


5. (/) There shall be constituted a Bureau called the Bureau of Immigration 
for performing the immigration functions and such other functions as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) The Bureau of Immigration referred to in sub-section (/) shall consist of 
such number of officers appointed by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) The general supervision, directions and control of the Bureau of 
Immigration, shall vest in and be exercised by the Central Government and the 
overall supervision of the immigration functions and such other functions as may be 
prescribed, shall vest in the officer appointed by the Central Government as 
Commissioner of Bureau of Immigration. 


(4) The Commissioner, Bureau of Immigration shall, in discharge of his duties 
under this Act, be assisted by the Foreigners Regional Registration Officers, 
Foreigners Registration Officers, Chief Immigration Officers and such Immigration 
Officers as may be authorised by the Central Government in this behalf. 


CHAPTER III 
MATTERS RELATED TO FOREIGNERS 
6. The foreigners on arrival in India shall be required to register with the 


Registration Officer concerned, subject to such conditions and in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


7. (1) The Central Government may, by an order or direction or instruction, 
make provisions, either generally or with respect to all foreigners or with respect to 
any particular foreigner or any specified class or description of foreigner, for 
prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of foreigners into India or, their 
departure therefrom or their presence or continued presence therein. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, the orders or directions or instructions issued under this section may provide 
that the foreigner— 


(a) shall not enter India, or shall enter India only at such times and by 
such route and at such port or place and subject to the observance of such 
conditions on arrival as may be specified; 


(b) shall not depart from India, or shall depart only at such times and by 
such route and from such port or place and subject to the observance of such 
conditions on departure as may be specified; 


(c) shall not remain in India or in any specified area therein; 


(d) shall, if he has been required by order or direction or instruction 
under this section not to remain in India, meet from any resources at his 
disposal the cost of his removal from India and of his maintenance therein 
pending such removal; 


(e) shall remove himself to, and remain in, such area in India as may be 
specified; 


(f) shall comply with such conditions as may be specified— 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(i) requiring him to present himself for examination, for such 
information in such manner, at such time, as may be required; 


(ii) requiring him to reside in a particular place; 
(iii) imposing any restrictions on his movements; 


(iv) requiring him to furnish such proof of his identity and to report 
such particulars to such authority in such manner and at such time and 
place as may be specified; 


(v) requiring him to allow his photograph and biometric information, 
as may be specified, to be taken and to furnish specimens of his 
handwriting and signature to such authority and at such time and place 
as may be specified; 


(vi) requiring him to submit himself to such medical examination 
by such authority and at such time and place as may be specified; 


(vii) prohibiting him from association with persons of a specified 
description; 


(viii) prohibiting him from engaging in activities of a specified 
description; 


(ix) prohibiting him from using or possessing specified articles; 


(x) regulating his conduct in any such particular as may be 
specified. 


(3) In addition to the foregoing, the Central Government may make provision 
for any matter which is to be or may be specified and for such incidental and 
supplementary matters as may be expedient or necessary for giving effect to 
this Act. 


(4) Any authority specified in this behalf may, with respect to any particular 
foreigner, issue order or direction or instruction under clause (f) of sub-section (2). 


8. (Z) It shall be the duty of the keeper of accommodation to submit to the 
Registration Officer such information in respect of foreigners accommodated in 
such accommodation and in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that subject to provisions of sub-section (3), provisions of this 
sub-section shall not be applicable to residential premises of non-commercial 
nature. 


(2) Every foreigner accommodated in such accommodation shall furnish to the 
keeper of accommodation thereof such particulars as may be required by him. 


(3) If in any area as may be specified in this behalf, the civil authority so 
directs, it shall be the duty of every person occupying or having under his control 
any residential premises to submit to the Registration Officer in such manner such 
information in respect of foreigner accommodated in such premises as may be 
specified. 


9. Every University and Educational Institution or any other institution 
admitting any foreigner shall furnish information to the Registration Officer in 
respect of such foreigner in such manner as may be prescribed. 


10. Every hospital, nursing home or any other such medical institution 
providing medical, lodging or sleeping facility in their premises shall furnish 
information in respect of any foreigner taking indoor medical treatment or their 
attendant for whom such lodging or sleeping facility has been provided to the 
Registration Officer in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Obligation of 
keeper of 
accommodation 
and others to 
furnish 
particulars. 


Obligation of 
Universities and 
Educational 
Institutions. 


Obligation of 
hospital, nursing 
home or any 
other medical 
institution. 


Visit to 
Protected or 
Restricted area 
or Prohibited 
places. 


Change of name 
of foreigner in 
India. 


Foreigners 
whose 
movements are 
restricted. 


Power to control 
places 
frequented by 
foreigners. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


11. No foreigner shall enter or stay in Protected area or Restricted area or 
Prohibited place without a special permit or permission granted by such authority 
as may be specified by an order published in the Official Gazette in this behalf and 
subject to such conditions as specified therein. 


12. (J) No foreigner who was in India on the date on which this Act came into 
force shall, while in India after that date, assume or use or purport to assume or use 
for any purpose, any name other than that by which he was ordinarily known 
immediately before the said date, except where a specific permission for change of 
name has been granted by such authority in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) No foreigner who has entered into India after the date on which this Act 
came into force shall, while in India after the date of his entry, assume or use or 
purport to assume or use for any purpose, any name other than that by which he was 
ordinarily known immediately before the said date of entry, except where a specific 
permission for change of name has been granted by such authority as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) For the purpose of this section— 
(a) the expression “name” includes a surname; and 
(b) a name shall be deemed to be changed if the spelling thereof is altered. 


(4) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the assumption or use by 
any married woman, of her husband’s name. 


13. (J) Any foreigner in respect of whom there is in force an order under 
clause (7) of sub-section (2) of section 7 requiring him to reside at a place set apart 
for the residence under supervision, for a number of foreigners, shall, while residing 
therein, be subject to such conditions as to maintenance, discipline and the 
punishment of offences and breaches of discipline as the Central Government may 
from time to time by order determine. 


(2) No person shall— 


(a) knowingly assist such a foreigner to escape from custody or the place 
set apart for his residence, or knowingly harbour any such foreigner; or 


(6) give such a foreigner any assistance with intent thereby to prevent, 
hinder or interfere with the apprehension of such a foreigner. 


(3) The Central Government may, by order, provide for regulating access to, 
and the conduct of persons in, places in India where such a foreigner whose 
movements are restricted is lodged, and for prohibiting or regulating the dispatch or 
conveyance from outside such places to or for such a foreigner therein of such 
articles as may be prescribed. 


14. (1) The civil authority may, subject to such conditions as may be 
prescribed, direct the owner or keeper having control of any premises frequented by 
any foreigner— 


(a) to close such premises either entirely or during specified periods; 


(5) to use or permit the use of such premises only under such conditions 
as may be specified; or 


(c) to refuse admission to such premises either to all foreigners or to any 
specified foreigner or class of foreigners. 


(2) A person to whom any direction has been given under sub-section (/) shall 
not, while such direction remains in force, use or permit to be used any other 
premises for any of the aforesaid purposes, except with the previous permission in 
writing of the civil authority and in accordance with any conditions which that 
authority may think fit to impose. 


47 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


(3) Any person to whom any direction has been given under sub-section (/) and who 
is aggrieved thereby may, within thirty days from the date of such direction, appeal to the 
Central Government, and the decision of the Central Government in the matter shall be final. 


15. When a foreigner, while in India with a valid passport or other travel 
document and valid visa, is recognised as a national by the law of more than one 
foreign country, the civil authority or Immigration Officer may, after due 
verification of all available documents and inquiry, treat that foreigner as the 
national of the country on whose passport or travel document he had entered into 
India or with which he appears to be most closely connected for the time being and 
the decision of civil authority or Immigration Officer in this regard shall be final: 


Provided that the Central Government, either of its own motion or on an 
application by the foreigner concerned, may revise any such decision. 


16. If in any case, not falling under section 15, any question arises with 
reference to this Act or any rule or order made or direction given thereunder, 
whether any person is or is not a foreigner of a particular class or description, the 
onus of proving that such person is not a foreigner or is not a foreigner of such 
particular class or description, as the case may be, shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, lie upon such person. 


CHAPTER IV 
LIABILITY OF CARRIERS 


17. (1) The carrier landing or embarking at a port or place in India shall furnish 
to a civil authority or Immigration Officer— 


(7) the passenger and crew manifest; 


(ii) the advance passenger information data of passengers and crew on 
board of such aircraft, vessel or other mode of transport, as the case may be; and 


(iii) the passenger name record information of passengers arriving or 
departing, 


in such form, containing such particulars, in such manner and within such time, as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) For the purposes of sub-section (/), the expression “passenger name record 
information” means the records prepared by an operator of any aircraft or vessel or 
other mode of transport or his authorised agent for each journey booked by or on 
behalf of any passenger. 


(3) Where the information referred to in sub-section (/) is not furnished to civil 
authority or Immigration Officer within the prescribed time and manner or false information 
is fumished and if civil authority or Immigration Officer is satisfied that there was no 
sufficient cause for such delay in furnishing the information or in the manner prescribed, the 
carrier shall be liable to such penalty specified in section 18 for each such information: 


Provided that no penalty shall be imposed without giving the carrier an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(4) Any person aggrieved by the penalty imposed under sub-section (3), may 
prefer an appeal to such authority in such form, manner and accompanied by such 
fee as may be prescribed. 


(5) Every such appeal shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from 
the date of the order appealed against: 


Provided that the appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period 
of thirty days, permit the appellant to prefer the appeal within a further period not 
exceeding thirty days. 


Foreigner who is 
national of more 
than one foreign 
country. 


Burden of proof. 


Obligation of 
carriers and like. 


Liability of 
carrier to pay 
penalty. 


Liability of 
carriers for 
passengers 
brought into 
India. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


(6) On receipt of any such appeal, the appellate authority shall, after giving 
the parties an opportunity of being heard and after making such inquiry as it deems 
proper, make such order, as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or reversing the 
order appealed against. 


(7) Any District Magistrate or any Commissioner of Police or, where there is 
no Commissioner of Police, any Superintendent of Police or the civil authority or 
Immigration Officer may, for any purpose connected with the enforcement of this 
Act or any rule or any order made thereunder, require the carrier to furnish such 
information as may be prescribed in respect of passengers or members of the crew 
on such aircraft, vessel or other mode of transport, as the case may be. 


(8) Any passenger on such carrier and any member of the crew of such carrier 
shall furnish to the carrier, any information required by him for the purpose of 
furnishing the information referred to in sub-section (/) or for furnishing the 
information required under sub-section (7). 


(9) If any foreigner whose entry has been refused, such foreigner shall be 
handed over to the carrier by the Immigration Officer and it shall be the 
responsibility of that carrier to ensure his removal from India without delay. 


(10) If any foreigner enters into India in contravention of any provisions of 
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, the civil authority or Immigration 
Officer may, within two months from the date of such entry, direct the carrier on 
which such entry was effected to provide accommodation, otherwise than at the 
expense of Central Government, on such aircraft or a vessel or any other mode of 
transport for the purpose of removing the said foreigner from India. 


(11) The carrier which is about to carry passengers from a port or place in India 
to any destination outside India, if so directed by the Central Government and on 
tender of payment therefor at the current rates, shall provide on the aircraft or vessel 
or any other mode of transport, accommodation to such port or place outside India, 
being a port or place at which the aircraft or vessel or any other mode of transport is 
due to call, as the Central Government may specify, for any foreigner ordered under 
section 7 not to remain in India and for his dependents, if any, travelling with him. 


(12) The carrier shall not cause or permit the aircraft or vessel or any other 
mode of transport to depart from a port or place in India until a clearance has been 
obtained from the Immigration Officer on submission of general declaration in such 
form, manner and with such particulars, as may be prescribed. 


(13) For the purposes of this section— 


(a) “carrier” shall also include pilot of aircraft, master of vessel, or 
company representative or station manager or operator of such aircraft or 
vessel or any other mode of transport or any person authorised by such carrier 
to discharge on his behalf any of the duties imposed on him by this section; 


(0) “passenger” means any person not being a bona fide member of the 
crew, travelling or seeking to travel on an aircraft or a vessel or any other mode 
of transport. 


CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND APPEAL 


18. The carrier, for contravention of the provisions of section 17, shall be liable 
to a penalty which may extend to fifty thousand rupees. 


19. (1) Where the civil authority or Immigration Officer is of the opinion that 
any carrier has brought a person, in contravention of the provisions of section 3 and 
rules or orders made thereunder, into India, he may, by order impose a penalty which 
shall not be less than two lakh rupees, but may extend to five lakh rupees, on such 
carrier: 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Provided that no order shall be passed without giving the carrier an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub-section (/), may prefer 
an appeal to such authority in such form, manner and accompanied by such fee as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) Every such appeal shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from 
the date of the order appealed against: 


Provided that the appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant 
was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period 
of thirty days, permit the appellant to prefer the appeal within a further period of 
thirty days. 


(4) On receipt of any such appeal, the appellate authority shall, after giving 
the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making such inquiry as 
it deems proper, make such order, as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or 
reversing the order appealed against. 


(5) Where any penalty imposed under this section is not paid, the civil 
authority or Immigration Officer may recover the penalty so payable by— 


(a) seizing or detaining the aircraft or the ship or any other mode of 
transport of the carrier; 


(b) seizing, detaining or selling any goods or properties belonging to the 
carrier; or 


(c) such other means as may be notified. 


20. (7) Any person who contravenes or attempts to contravene, or abets or 
attempts to abet, or does any act preparatory to a contravention of, any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made or direction given thereunder, or 
fails to comply with any direction given in pursuance of any such order, shall be 
deemed to have contravened the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Any person who, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that any 
other person has contravened the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made 
or direction given thereunder, gives that other person any assistance with intent 
thereby to prevent, hinder or otherwise interfere with his arrest, trial or punishment 
for the said contravention shall be deemed to have abetted that contravention. 


(3) The carrier, by means of which any foreigner enters or leaves India in 
contravention of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, or direction given in 
pursuance of section 7 shall, unless he proves that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the said contravention, be deemed to have contravened this Act. 


21. Any foreigner who enters into any area in India without a valid passport or other 
travel document, including visa required for such entry in contravention of provisions of 
section 3 of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder or any direction given in 
pursuance thereof, shall be punishable with an imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to five years or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both. 


22. Whoever knowingly uses or supplies a forged or fraudulently obtained 
passport or other travel document or visa for entering into India or staying in or 
exiting from India, shall be punishable with an imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than two years, but may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to ten lakh rupees: 


Provided that any attempt for above mentioned use of forged or fraudulently 
obtained passport or any other travel document or visa found for such entry or exit 
from India shall also be treated as an offence under this section. 


Contravention or 
attempts to 
contravene 
provisions of 
Act. 


Penalty for entry 
without valid 

passport or other 
travel document. 


Penalty for 
using or 
supplying 
forged or 
fraudulently 
obtained 
passport or 
other travel 
document and 
visa. 


Penalty for 
contraventions 
of other 
provisions of 
this Act. 


Penalty for 
abetment. 


Compounding of 
certain offences. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


23. Whoever,— 


(a) being a foreigner, remains in any area in India for a period exceeding 
the period for which the visa was issued to him or stays in India without a 
valid passport or other valid travel document in contravention of provisions of 
section 3 or does any act in violation of the conditions of the valid visa issued 
to him for his entry and stay in India or any part thereunder; 


(6) contravenes any other provisions of this Act, other than sections 17 
and 19, or of any rule or order made thereunder or any direction or instruction 
given in pursuance of this Act or such order or direction or instruction for 
which, no specific punishment is provided under this Act, 


shall be punishable with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
years or with a fine which may extend to three lakh rupees or with both. 


24. (1) Whoever abets any offence punishable under sections 21 or 22 or 23 
shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment, be punishable 
with the same punishment as provided for those offences. 


(2) For the purposes of this section,— 


(i) an act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of the 
abetment, when it is committed in consequence of the instigation, or in 
pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which constitutes the offence; 


(ii) the expression “abetment” shall have the same meaning as assigned 
to it under section 45 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


25. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, any offence punishable under sections 21, 23 or section 24 whether 
committed by an individual or a company or an organisation or any officer or 
employee or a representative thereof, may, either before the institution of 
prosecution or during trial, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for 
such sums as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf: 


Provided that the sum so specified shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum 
amount of the fine which may be imposed under sections 21 or 23 for the offence 
so compounded. 


(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (/) shall apply to an offence committed, 
by an individual or a company or an organisation or any officer or employee or 
representative thereof within a period of three years from the date on which a similar 
offence committed by it or him was compounded under this section. 


(3) Every officer or authority referred to in sub-section (/) shall exercise the 
powers to compound an offence, subject to the directions, control and supervision 
of the Central Government. 


(4) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any prosecution 
or before commencement of trial, no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such 
offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so compounded. 


(5) Where the compounding of an offence is made after the institution of 
prosecution or during trial, such compounding shall be brought by the authority 
specified for such compounding in writing, to the notice of the court in which the 
prosecution or trial is pending and on such notice of the compounding of offences 
being given, the individual or the company or the organisation or any officer or 
employee in relation to whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged. 


(6) For the purposes of this section, any second or subsequent offence 
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the 
offence was previously compounded, shall be deemed to be a first offence. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


26. Any officer of police, not below the rank of a Head Constable may arrest 
without warrant any person who has contravened or against whom a reasonable 
suspicion exists that he has contravened section 3 or any rule or order made thereof 
and the provisions of section 58 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of any such arrest. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


27. (1) Any authority empowered by or under or in pursuance of the provisions 
of this Act or rule or order made thereunder to give any direction or to exercise any 
other power may, in addition to any other action expressly provided for in this Act, 
take or cause to be taken such steps and use, or cause to be used, such force as may, 
in its opinion, be reasonably necessary for securing compliance with such direction 
or for preventing or rectifying any breach thereof, or for the effective exercise of 
such power, as the case may be. 


(2) Any police officer, not below the rank of Head Constable, may take such 
steps and use such force as may, in his opinion, be reasonably necessary for securing 
compliance with any rule or order made or direction given under or in pursuance of 
the provisions of this Act or for preventing or rectifying any breach of such rule or 
order or direction. 


(3) The power conferred by this section shall be deemed to confer upon any 
person acting in exercise thereof a right of access to any land or other property 
whatsoever. 


28. The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any power or 
functions which may be exercised or performed by it under this Act or by any rule 
or order made thereunder, subject to such conditions, if any, as it may specify in 
such notification, be exercised or performed— 


(a) by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government; 


(6) by any State Government or by any officer or authority subordinate 
to such Government or any officer or authority authorised by such 
Government. 


29. The Central Government may, by general or special order, direct the 
removal of a foreigner from India for contravention of any of the provisions of this 
Act or any rule or order made thereunder or an adverse security report, and 
thereupon any officer of the Government shall have all reasonable powers necessary 
to enforce such directions. 


30. (7) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) such other functions to be carried out by Immigration Officer 
under clause (४) of section 2; 


(6) the conditions subject to which the other travel document issued 
under clause (m) of section 2; 


(2) the conditions subject to which the passport issued under clause (n) 
of section 2; 


(d) the authority authorised to grant visa under clause (7) of section 2; 


(e) such other functions to be performed by the Bureau of Immigration 
under sub-section (/) of section 5; 


Power to arrest. 


Power to give 
effect to orders, 
directions, and 
like. 


Power to 
delegate 
authority. 


Power of 
removal. 


Power to make 
tules. 


12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


(f) the manner of appointment of officers of the Bureau of Immigration 
under sub-section (2) of section 5; 


(g) the other functions which shall vest in the officers appointed by the 
Central Government as Commissioners of the Bureau of Immigration under 
sub-section (3) of section 5; 


(A) the conditions and the manner subject to which the foreigners on arrival 
in India shall be required to register with the Registration Officer under section 6; 


(i) the manner of submission of the information of foreigners to the 
Registration Officer by the keeper of accommodation under section 8; 


(7) the manner of submission of the information of foreigners to the 
Registration Officer by the Universities and Educational Institutions under 
section 9; 


(k) the manner of submission of the information of foreigners to the 
Registration Officer by the hospitals, nursing homes and other medical 
institutions under section 10; 


(/) the authority and the manner for change of name of a foreigner subject 
to a specific permission under sub-sections (/) and (2) of section 12; 

(m) the restriction of the dispatch of such articles to or for a foreigner 
under sub-section (3) of section 13; 


(n) the conditions subject to which the civil authority may exercise the 
power to control places frequented by foreigners under section 14; 


(०) the form, particulars, the manner and the time within which the 
information to be furnished by carrier to the civil authority or Immigration 
Officer under sub-section (/) of section 17; 


(p) the appellate authority, form, manner and the fee to be accompanied 
for filing an appeal under sub-section (4) of section 17; 


(q) the information to be required by District Magistrate or any 
Commissioner of Police from the carrier under sub-section (7) of section 17; 


(r) the form, manner and such particulars to be submitted by the carrier 
to the Immigration Officer under sub-section (/2) of section 17; 

(s) the appellate authority, form, manner and the fee to be accompanied 
for filing an appeal under sub-section (2) of section 19; 


(0) any matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which 
provision is to be made by rules. 


Rules to be laid 31. Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
Laer made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 

to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 
Protection of 32. No suit or any other proceeding shall lie against any person for anything done, 
peers in or intended to be done in good faith under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
Power to 33. (1) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
exempt in Gazette, declare that all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order 


Contin 0386; made thereunder shall not apply, or shall apply only in such circumstances or with 


such exceptions or modifications or subject to such conditions as may be specified 
in such order, to or in relation to— 


34 of 1920. 
16 of 1939. 
31 of 1946. 
52 of 2000. 


10 of 1897. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13 


(a) the citizens or class of citizens of any such country as may be so 
specified; or 
(6) any other individual foreigner or class or description of foreigner. 


(2) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do in the public interest or to fulfil the international obligation, by 
order published in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions as may be 
specified therein, exempt any carrier or class of carriers from the operations of all 
or any of the provisions of this Act and may, as often as may be necessary, revoke 
or modify such order. 


(3) A copy of every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


34. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of 
the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. 


35. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of a period of three years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


36. (J) The Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Registration of 
Foreigners Act, 1939, the Foreigners Act, 1946 and the Immigration (Carriers’ 
Liability) Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred to as repealed Acts) are hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or 
purported to have been done or taken, including any rules, orders, directions, 
instructions, regulations or any proceedings made or issued or taken or given or any 
penalty or fine imposed under the repealed Acts shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provision of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken 
under the corresponding provisions of this Act. 


(3) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub-section (2) shall 
not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of repeal. 


Application of 
other laws not 
barred. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
saving. 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The matters relating to foreigners and immigration are presently 
administered through the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Immigration 
(Carriers’ Liability) Act, 2000 (52 of 2000). The Foreigners Act, 1946 was 
enacted to confer upon the Central Government certain powers in respect of 
foreigners. The Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Act, 2000 was enacted to make 
the carriers liable in respect of passengers brought by them into India in 
contravention of the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 
of 1920) and the rules made thereunder and matters connected therewith. The 
other relevant Acts relating to foreigners and immigration are the Passport 
(Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 
1939). These two Acts were enacted with a view to take power to require 
passports of persons entering into India; and to provide for the registration of 
foreigners in India. 


2. The Acts, namely the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, the Registration 
of Foreigners Act, 1939 and the Foreigners Act, 1946 are not only of 
pre-Constitution period, but also, they were brought into extraordinary times of first 
and second world wars. While there is an underlying continuity and commonality 
of objectives among the four Acts, there are some overlapping provisions among 
the said Acts. 


3. In view of the reasons mentioned in the preceding paragraphs, there is a 
necessity to repeal all the aforesaid four Acts and to enact a new comprehensive 
legislation, namely the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025. The proposed 
legislation is to be enacted with a view to confer upon the Central Government 
certain powers to provide for requirement of passports or other travel documents 
in respect of persons entering into and exiting from India and for regulating 
matters related to foreigners including requirement of visa and registration and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The proposed legislation is 
being enacted to avoid multiplicity and overlapping of laws on the same or related 
subject and to comply with the Government of India’s policy of simplification of 
laws. 


4. The Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025, inter alia, provides for the 
following, namely:— 


(7) the matters relating to immigration, namely the functions of 
Immigration Officer, the requirement of passport and visa and other matters; 


(ii) the matters relating to foreigners and their registration; 


(iii) the provisions relating to obligation of universities and educational 
institutions admitting any foreigner; 


(iv) the obligation of hospital, nursing home or any other medical 
institution admitting the foreigners; 


(v) the provisions relating to foreigners whose movements are restricted; 


(vi) the power of civil authority to control places frequented by 
foreigners; 


(vii) the provisions relating to liability of carriers and its obligations; 


(viii) the offences and punishment for contravention of certain 
provisions of the proposed legislation and composition of offences; 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15 


(ix) the power of Central Government to issue orders for removal of 
foreigners, to delegate and exempt; and 


(x) to repeal the existing four Acts relating to foreigners and 
immigration. 


5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The 4th February, 2025. 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the 
proposed legislation. 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for certain definitions. 


Clause 3 of the Bill relates to requirement of passport or other travel document 
and visa. 


This clause provides for the requirement of possession of a valid passport or 
other travel document by any person entering or attempting to enter into India and 
in case of a foreigner also a valid visa. 


Clause 4 of the Bill relates to Immigration Posts for entry or exit. 


This clause provides for specifying the designated Immigration Posts for entry 
into or exit from India by the Central Government at such places as may be notified. 


Clause 5 of the Bill relates to Bureau of Immigration. 


This clause provides for constitution of a Bureau called the Bureau of 
Immigration for performing immigration functions and such other functions as may 
be provided by rules. 


Clause 6 of the Bill relates to Registration of foreigners. 


This clause provides for registration by foreigners with the Registration 
Officer on arrival in India. 


Clause 7 of the Bill relates to power to issue orders, directions or instructions. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make provisions by 
order or instructions for prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of foreigners 
into India or, their departure therefrom or their presence or continued presence 
therein. 


Clause 8 of the Bill relates to obligation of keeper of accommodation and 
others to furnish particulars. 


This clause provides for submission of information as may be provided by 
rules in respect of foreigners accommodated in any accommodation by the keeper 
of such accommodation to the Registration Officer. 


Clause 9 of the Bill relates to obligation of Universities and Educational 
Institutions. 


This clause provides for submission of information as may be provided by 
tules in respect of foreigners admitted by any University or Educational Institution 
or any other institution to the Registration Officer. 


Clause 10 of the Bill relates to obligation of hospital, nursing home or any 
other medical institution. 


This clause provides for submission of information as may be provided by 
tules in respect of foreigners taking indoor medical treatment or their attendants for 
whom lodging or sleeping facility has been provided by any hospital, nursing home 
or any other such medical institution providing medical, lodging or sleeping facility 
in their premises to the Registration Officer. 


Clause 11 of the Bill relates to visit to Protected or Restricted area or 
prohibited places. 


This clause provides for prohibiting the entry or stay by a foreigner in a 
Protected or Restricted area or a prohibited place, except with a special permit or 
permission granted. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17 


Clause 12 of the Bill relates to change of name of foreigner in India. 


This clause provides for prohibition on changing the name by a foreigner while in 
India except with specific permission by such authority as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 13 of the Bill relates to foreigners whose movements are restricted. 


This clause provides for regulating the stay of a foreigner in respect of whom 
there is in force an order under item (f) of sub-clause (2) of clause 7 requiring him 
to reside at a place set apart for the purpose. 


Clause 14 of the Bill relates to power to control places frequented by 
foreigners. 


This clause seeks to empower the civil authority to control any premises 
frequented by foreigners subject to such conditions as may be provided by rules. 


Clause 15 of the Bill relates to foreigner who is national of more than one 
foreign country. 


This clause seeks to empower the civil authority or Immigration Officer to 
determine the nationality of a foreigner in such cases when a foreigner while in India 
with a valid passport or other travel document and a valid visa is recognised as a 
national by law of more than one foreign country. 


Clause 16 of the Bill relates to Burden of proof. 


This clause seeks to cast the burden of proving that a person is not a foreigner 
or is not a foreigner of such particular class or description, as the case may be, upon 
such person. 


Clause 17 of the Bill relates to obligation of carriers and like. 


This clause provides for furnishing of the passenger and crew manifest, the 
advance passenger information data of passengers and crew on board and the 
passenger name record information of passengers arriving or departing, by a carrier 
landing or embarking at a port or place in India to the civil authority. 


Clause 18 of the Bill relates to liability of carrier to pay penalty. 


This clause provides for penalty for contravention of the provisions of 
clause 17. 


Clause 19 of the Bill relates to liability of carriers for passengers brought into 
India. 


This clause provides for imposing penalty on the carrier by the civil authority 
where the carrier has brought a person in contravention of the provisions of 
clause 3 and rules or orders made thereunder into India. It also provides for 
procedure for filing of appeal by the carrier and its disposal by the appellate 
authority. 


Clause 20 of the Bill relates to attempts and like to contravene provisions of 
this Act. 


This clause seeks to specify as to what constitutes contravention of provisions 
of this Act. 


Clause 21 of the Bill relates to penalty for entry without valid passport or other 
travel document. 


This clause seeks to lay down penalty on a foreigner who enters into in any 
area in India without a valid passport or other travel document, including visa, 
required for such entry in contravention of provisions of clause 3 of this Act or of 
any rule or order made thereunder or any direction given in pursuance thereof. 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


Clause 22 of the Bill relates to penalty for using or supplying forged or 
fraudulently obtained passport or other travel document and visa. 


This clause seeks to lay down penalty for using a forged or fraudulently 
obtained passport or other travel document or visa for entering into India or staying 
in or exiting from India. 


Clause 23 of the Bill relates to penalty for contravention of other provisions 
of this Act. 


This clause seeks to lay down penalty on a foreigner for remaining in any area 
in India for a period exceeding the period for which the visa was issued to him or 
stays in India without a valid passport or other valid travel document in 
contravention of provisions of clause 3 or does any act in violation of the conditions 
of the valid visa issued to him for his entry and stay in India or any part thereunder. 
It also seeks to lay down penalty on any person who contravenes any other 
provisions of this Act, other than sections 17 and 19, or of any rule or order made 
thereunder or any direction or instruction given in pursuance of this Act or such 
order or direction or instruction for which no specific punishment is provided under 
this Act. 


Clause 24 of the Bill relates to penalty for abetment. 


This clause seeks to lay down penalty on any person who abets any offence 
punishable under clauses 21, 22 or 23. 


Clause 25 of the Bill relates to compounding of certain offences. 


This clause provides for compounding of any offence punishable under 
clause 21 or 23 or clause 24 (in so far as it relates to an offence committed under 
clause 21 or 23). 


Clause 26 of the Bill relates to power to arrest. 


This clause provides for arrest without warrant any person who has 
contravened or against whom reasonable suspicion exists that he has contravened 
clause 3 or any rule or order made thereof, by an officer of police not below the rank 
of Head Constable and the provisions of section 58 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, so may be, apply in the case of any such arrest. 


Clause 27 of the Bill relates to power to give effect to orders, directions, and 
the like. 


This clause provides to take or cause to be taken such steps and use or cause 
to be used such force as may be reasonably necessary by the authority empowered 
to give any direction or to exercise any other power, for securing compliance with 
direction or for preventing or rectifying any breach thereof or for the effective 
exercise of such power, as the case may be. 


Clause 28 of the Bill relates to power to delegate authority. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to direct, by 
notification, that any power or functions which may be exercised or performed by 
it under this Act or by any rule or order made thereunder, may be exercised by such 
officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or by any State 
Government or by any officer or authority subordinate to such Government or any 
officer or authority authorised by such Government. 


Clause 29 of the Bill relates to power of removal. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to direct, by general or 
special order, removal of a foreigner from India for contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder or an adverse security 
report. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 19 


Clause 30 of the Bill relates to power to make rules. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules to carry 
out the purposes of the proposed legislation. 


Clause 31 of the Bill relates to rules to be laid before Parliament. 


This clause seeks to require that rules made under this Act are to be laid before 
each House of Parliament. 


Clause 32 of the Bill relates to protection of action taken in good faith. 


This clause seeks to protect any person for anything done, or intended to be 
done in good faith under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 


Clause 33 of the Bill relates to power to exempt in certain cases. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to declare, by order, 
that all or any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or order made thereunder 
shall not apply or shall apply only in such circumstances or with such exceptions or 
modifications or subject to such conditions as may be specified in such order, to or 
in relation to the citizens or class of citizens of any such country as may be so 
specified, or any other individual foreigner or class or description of foreigner. 


Clause 34 of the Bill relates to application of other laws not barred. 


This clause seeks to provide that provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other enactment for the time being in 
force. 


Clause 35 of the Bill relates to power to remove difficulties. 


This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to issue an order for 
removal of any difficulty which may arise during implementation of the proposed 
legislation. 


Clause 36 of the Bill relates to repeal and saving. 


This clause provides that the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of 
1920), the Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939 (16 of 1939), the Foreigners Act, 
1946 (31 of 1946) and the Immigration (Carriers’ Liability) Act, 2000 (52 of 2000) 
are repealed. For continuity of rules and orders till framing and notification of new 
rules, the rules, regulations and orders made under the repealed Acts shall, in so far 
as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue in force 
accordingly till the new rules, regulations or orders are made under this Act. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Provisions in the Bill are regulatory in nature. Even though clause 5 of the 
Bill provides for constitution of a Bureau of Immigration assisted by Foreigners 
Regional Registration Officers, Chief Immigration Officers and such number of 
Immigration Officers as may be appointed by the Central Government, as a set-up 
of Bureau of Immigration with officers is already in place and functioning. 
Provisions in clause 5 of the Bill are meant to provide specific legal backup for the 
immigration function, Immigration Officer and the Bureau of Immigration. 
Therefore, the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025, if enacted, is not likely to 
involve additional expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of 
the Consolidated Fund of India. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 30 of the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 seeks to empower the 
Central Government to make rules, by notification, for carrying out the purposes of 
the proposed legislation, to make rules for— (a) such other functions to be carried 
out by Immigration Officer under item (A) of clause 2; (0) the conditions subject to 
which the other travel document issued under item (7) of clause 2; (2) the conditions 
subject to which the passport issued under item (n) of clause 2; (d) the authority 
authorised to grant visa under item (7) of clause 2; (e) such other functions to be 
performed by the Bureau of Immigration under sub-clause (/) of clause 5; (f) the 
manner of appointment of officers of the Bureau of Immigration under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 5; (g) the other functions which shall vest in the officer 
appointed by the Central Government as Commissioner of Bureau of Immigration 
under sub-clause (3) of clause 5; (1) the conditions and the manner subject to which 
the foreigners on arrival in India shall be required to register with the Registration 
Officer under clause 6; (7) the manner of submission of the details of foreigners to 
the Registration Officer by the keeper of accommodation under clause 8; (7) the 
manner of submission of the details of foreigners to the Registration Officer by the 
Universities and Educational Institutions under clause 9; (4) the manner of 
submission of the details of foreigners to the Registration Officer by the hospitals, 
nursing homes and other medical institutions under clause 10; (/) the authority and 
the manner for change of name of a foreigner subject to a specific permission under 
sub-clauses (/) and (2) of clause 12; (m) the restriction on the dispatch of such 
articles to or for a foreigner under sub-clause (3) of clause 13; (7) the conditions 
subject to which the civil authority may exercise the power to control places 
frequented by foreigners under clause 14; (०) the form, manner and timeline of 
furnishing of particulars of persons and other information by carrier under 
sub-clause (/) of clause 17; (p) the appellate authority, form, manner and the fee to 
be accompanied for filing an appeal under sub-clause (4) of clause 17; (4) the 
information to be required by District Magistrate or any Commissioner of Police 
from the carrier under sub-clause (7) of clause 17; (r) the form, manner and such 
particulars to be submitted by the carrier to the Immigration Officer under 
sub-clause (/2) of clause 17; (७) the appellate authority, form, manner and the fee to 
be accompanied for filing an appeal under sub-clause (2) of clause 19; (0) any matter 
which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which provision is to be made 
by rules. 


2. The matters in respect of which rules may be made under the aforesaid 
provisions are matters of procedures and administrative details and it is not 
practicable to provide them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative powers 
is, therefore, of a normal character. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART वी 


BILL No. 34 oF 2025 


A Bill to provide for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 


Short title. 


Issue of Rs. 
1291,13,75,174 
out of the 
Consolidated 
Fund of India to 
meet certain 
excess 
expenditure for 
the year ended 
on the 31st 
March, 2022. 


Fund of India to meet the amounts spent on certain services during the 
financial year ended on the 31st day of March, 2022, in excess of the amounts 
granted for those services and for that year. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


1. This Act may be called the Appropriation Act, 2025. 


2. From and out of the Consolidated Fund of India, the sums specified in 
column 3 of the Schedule, amounting in the aggregate to the sum of one thousand 
two hundred ninety-one crore, thirteen lakh, seventy-five thousand, one hundred and 
seventy-four rupees shall be deemed to have been authorised to be paid and applied 
to meet the amounts spent for defraying the charges in respect of the services 
specified in column 2 of the Schedule during the financial year ended on the 
31st day of March, 2022, in excess of the amounts granted for those services and for 
that year. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


3. The sums deemed to have been authorised to be paid and applied from and Appropriation. 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India under this Act shall be deemed to have been 
appropriated for the services and purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to 
the financial year ended on the 31st day of March, 2022. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [ParT पी 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2 and 3) 
1 2 3 
No. Excess 
of Services and purposes Voted portion Charged portion 
Vote Total 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 

6 Department of Fertilisers ...............---२०००-००००००-००- eens Revenue 493 ,37,93,293 493 ,37,93,293 

18 Ministry of Defence ((शा।)....................--------००--- Revenue 3,16,544 3,16,544 

39 P@NSIONS Siena रत मम मम मर अल मा अत Revenue 742,56,55,188 742,56,55,188 

84 Ministry: ७१ 8ए8,.. ५०४०४ ५५२४६४४० २०४४० ०४/३०/३३४३ ४३३ Capital 55,16,10,149 55,16,10,149 

TOTAL 1235,94,48,481 55,19,26,693 1291,13,75,174 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
This Bill is introduced in pursuance of Article 114(1) of the Constitution of 
India, read with Article 115 thereof, to provide for the appropriation out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India of the moneys required to meet the expenditure incurred 
in excess of the grants made by the Lok Sabha for expenditure of the 
Central Government, for the financial year ended 31st day of March, 2022. 


NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 


[Letter No. 7(1)-B(SD)/2024 dated 07.03.2025 from Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister 
of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha] 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Bill to 
provide for the authorisation of appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated 
Fund of India to meet the amounts spent on certain services during the financial year 
ended on the 31st day of March 2022, in excess of the amounts granted for the said 
services and for that year recommended under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 of 
the Constitution, read with clause (2) of article 115 thereof, the introduction of the 
Appropriation Bill, 2025, in Lok Sabha and also recommends to Lok Sabha the 
consideration of the Bill. 


Short title. 


Issue of Rs. 
678508, 10,00,000 
out of the 
Consolidated 
Fund of India for 
the financial year 
2024-25. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART वी 


BiLt No. 35 oF 2025 


A Bill to authorise payment and appropriation of certain further sums from and out 
of the Consolidated Fund of India for the services of the financial year 2024-25. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


1. This Act may be called the Appropriation (No. 2) Act, 2025. 


2. From and out of the Consolidated Fund of India there may be paid and 
applied sums not exceeding those specified in column 3 of the Schedule amounting 
in the aggregate to the sum of six lakh seventy-eight thousand five hundred eight 
crore and ten lakh rupees only towards defraying the several charges which will 
come in course of payment during the financial year 2024-25 in respect of the 
services specified in column 2 of the Schedule. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


3. The sums authorised to be paid and applied from and out of the Appropriation. 


Consolidated Fund of India by this Act shall be appropriated for the services and 
purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to the said year. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [ParT पी 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2 and 3) 
1 2 3 
No. Sums not exceeding 
of Services and purposes Voted by Charged on the 
Vote Parliament Consolidated Total 
Fund 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
1 Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare........ Revenue 2185,66,00,000 2185,66,00,000 
Capital 22,69,00,000 22,69,00,000 
2 Department of Agricultural Research and Education.... Revenue 2,00,00,000 2,00,00,000 
3 Atomic »। 11 5160 (मम तन मम मम baat Revenue 637,25,00,000 637,25,00,000 
4 Ministryof AY US siccssccctuccaveeasneteucicatinentwacsanescs Capital 4,90,00,000 4,90,00,000 
5 Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals............ Revenue 1351,38,00,000 1351,38,00,000 
6 Department of Fertilizers.......... मत Revenue 17100,00,00,000 17100,00,00,000 
8 Ministry of Civil /8णञंधांणा..................-.. ००-०० --- Revenue 68,10,00,000 68,10,00,000 
Capital 2,39,00,000 2,39,00,000 
10 Department of Commerce..............:eceeeeee tent ee ee eens Revenue 1,00,000 61,19,00,000 61,20,00,000 
Capital 27,00,000 Pa 27,00,000 
11 Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade... Revenue 5,52,00,000 5,52,00,000 
12 Department of Posts: .iiiccissaccisesnaqesnssaasades ve nancies Revenue 482,41,00,000 482,41,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
13 Department of Telecommunications..................0008 Revenue 10822,16,00,000 10822,16,00,000 
Capital 235,96,00,000 235,96,00,000 
15 Department of Food and Public Distribution............. Revenue 2,00,000 1,34,00,000 1,36,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 थे 1,00,000 
17 Ministry of है ४ (३ ९1१: ०03 1/:1 | । हि लि न कि मम कलम Revenue 5,00,00,000 5,00,00,000 
18 Ministry of Culture Revenue 65,00,00,000 65,00,00,000 
Capital 2,00,000 2,00,000 
19 Ministry of Defence (Civil)...............cceceeeeeeeeee tees Revenue 177,66,00,000 177,66,00,000 
Capital 793,62,00,000 793,62,00,000 
20 Defence Services (Revenue)...............cceceeeee eee ees Revenue 7278,66,00,000 13,80,00,000 7292,46,00,000 
21 Capital Outlay on Defence $हएं०९४................. ... Capital 1,00,000 5,11,00,000 5,12,00,000 
22 Defence: PENSIONS se मन अर टी मम मम मत Revenue 8476,00,00,000 8476,00,00,000 
25 Department of School Education and Literacy........... Revenue 2,00,000 2,00,000 
26 Department of Higher 50प्रटा0ा. ................... Revenue 3,00,000 3,00,000 
29 Ministry of External काशि53. ................... ७०००-०० Revenue 379,50,00,000 379,50,00,000 
30 Department of Economic Affairs.................00.0ee00 Revenue 30750,00,00,000 30750,00,00,000 
Capital 683,79,00,000 683,79,00,000 
31 Department of Expenditure................ 0. cceeeeeeneeee es Revenue 41,22,00,000 41,22,00,000 
32 Department of Financial 5छएं००४................... Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
35 Department of Revenue...............ceceeeeeeeeeeee ee ee eee Revenue 1,00,000 1,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
CHARGED.— Repayment ०142९01..................................- Capital 554349,00,00,000 554349,00,00,000 
41 19019 20 व कै 1 अर serene Revenue 13449,00,00,000 30,00,00,000 13479,00,00,000 
44 Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying.......... Revenue 2,00,000 2,00,000 
45 Ministry of Food Processing Industries..................4 Revenue 2,00,000 2,00,000 
51 PON मर मम नर रस मर कमल कक Revenue 315,01,00,000 315,01,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
52 Andaman and Nicobar Islands.................0..0eeeee ees Revenue 7,00,000 7,00,000 
Capital 5,00,000 5,00,000 
54 Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu............ Capital 2,00,000 2,00,000 
55 1 1210 121 16 मकर at किक रा भी मत मर अमल Revenue 3,00,000 3,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


29 


1 2 3 
No. Sums not exceeding 
of Services and purposes Voted by Charged on the 
Vote Parliament Consolidated Total 
Fund 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
58 Transfers to Jammu and 6 दाग. ......................-..- Revenue 3722,33,00,000 3722,33,00,000 
59 Transfers to Puducherry...............:ceceeeeeeeeeeneeeeees Revenue 61,00,00,000 61,00,00,000 
60 Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs................... Revenue 11,01,00,000 11,01,00,000 
Capital 588,50,00,000 588,50,00,000 
62 Department of Water Resources, River Development 
and: Ganga Rejuvenation: 22.52 scesccaseseswsvens comeeasseces Revenue 4,00,000 4,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
63 Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation........... Revenue 2,00,000 2,00,000 
65 Law ‘atid! JUSHCE..ci.dscasiinscsensescasiineyeasionsiedamedaaiudes Revenue 723,11,00,000 723,11,00,000 
Capital 8,69,00,000 8,69,00,000 
66 Election Commission.............c.ccececeeeeseecsceeeeeeaes Revenue 6,00,00,000 6,00,00,000 
CHARGED.—Supreme Court ए्ववींव...... ... ... ... ... .... ०... रिलएशाप 17,50,00,000 17,50,00,000 
68 Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises....... Revenue 1,00,000 1,00,000 
70 Ministry of Minority Affairs............. 0... eceeeeee ee ee ees Revenue 1,00,000 1,00,000 
71 Ministry of New and Renewable Energy.................. Revenue 3,00,000 3,00,000 
72 Ministry of Panchayati Raj........... न की eee eee Revenue 1,00,000 1,00,000 
74 Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions Revenue 7,00,00,000 7,00,00,000 
76 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural (85............. ... . .- Revenue 3100,00,00,000 3100,00,00,000 
Capital 30,01,00,000 30,01,00,000 
78 Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways.............. Revenue 95,80,00,000 95,80,00,000 
79 MiiistryOf POWeE (न न मम तय Capital 48,06,00,000 48,06,00,000 
85 Ministry of Railways Revenue 1,00,000 6,82,00,000 6,83,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
86 Ministry of Road Transport and Highways............... Revenue 2,63,00,000 2,63,00,000 
Capital 13500,00,00,000 13500,00,00,000 
89 Department of Science and Technology.................. Revenue 1,00,000 1,00,000 
Capital 1,00,000 1,00,000 
91 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research........ Capital 15,00,000 15,00,000 
95 Department: Of: Space iui last vsdooseves दे कह +्दी३ २९७ ४५३६१ २३ Revenue 34,00,000 34,00,000 
97 Ministty Of Steel yicigeds cid किक नर लत कल मी Capital 6783,00,00,000 6783,00,00,000 
TOTAL 124023,00,00,000 554485,10,00,000 678508,10,00,000 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

This Bill is introduced in pursuance of article 114(1) of the Constitution of 

India, read with article 115 thereof, to provide for the appropriation out of the 

Consolidated Fund of India of the moneys required to meet the supplementary 

expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and the grants made by 

the Lok Sabha for expenditure of the Central Government for the financial 
year 2024-25. 

NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 


[Letter No. 4(30)-B(SD)/2024 dated 07.03.2025 from Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, 
Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the Secretary General, Lok Sabha] 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the proposed Bill to 
authorise payment and appropriation of certain further sums from and out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India for the services of the financial year 2024-25, 
recommends under article 117 (1) and (3) of the Constitution, the introduction of 
the Appropriation (No. 2) Bill, 2025 in Lok Sabha and also the consideration of the 


Bill. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


BILL No. 37 oF 2025 


A Bill to authorise payment and appropriation of certain further sums from and out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur for the services of the 
financial year 2024-25. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


1. This Act may be called the Manipur Appropriation Act, 2025. 


2. From and out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur there may 
be paid and applied sums not exceeding those specified in column 3 of the Schedule 
amounting in the aggregate to the sum of one thousand eight hundred sixty-one 
crore, forty-four lakh and thirty-six thousand rupees towards defraying the several 
charges which will come in course of payment during the financial year 2024-25 in 
respect of the services specified in column 2 of the Schedule. 


Short title. 


Issue of Rs. 
1861,44,36,000 
from and out of 
the Consolidated 
Fund of the State 
of Manipur for 
the financial year 
2024-25. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II]— 


Appropriation. 3. The sums authorised to be paid and applied from and out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur by this Act shall be appropriated for the 
services and purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to the said year. 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


33 


THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2 and 3) 
1 2 3 
No. of Sums not exceedin: 
Vote / Services and Purposes Voted by Charged on the 
Apptro- Parliament Consolidated Total 
priation Fund 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
1 State Legislature... ..is.sssisisischavsnusnsesacrsueseanes Revenue 24,20,88,000 24,20,88,000 
Capital 20,00,000 20,00,000 
Interest Payment and Debt Services ........ css Revenue 12,00,82,000 12,00,82,000 
Capital 537,97,17,000 537,97,17,000 
3 SOCVCHANAL, sccdcssdscssvssnsdansdenascleaiaesens cradesactunesenanes Revenue 4,65,30,000 4,65,30,000 
5 Finance: Department s,..32¢)csncwtesaotabliaedteiuediaeetbeyncs Revenue 445,73,70,000 445,73,70,000 
6 TLANSPOLt nce मम की कह मम ३ अमल मत Revenue 4,73,50,000 4,73,50,000 
Capital 84,00,000 84,00,000 
Police Revenue 252,45,40,000 5) 252,45,40,000 
Public Works Department. ................cseseseeseeseeeeseeeenes Capital = 98, 90,000 98,90,000 
14 Department of Tribal Affairs and पा।5........................-.- Capital 31,81,08,000 31,81,08,000 
20 Community and Rural Development....................0055 Revenue 97,06,75,000 97,06,75,000 
Capital 39,42,20,000 39,42,20,000 
23 POW Cl २६८२ कप vena nsinndsaicaw ४५३५ ढक २४ ४7053 २० रत wahoatanetes Revenue 49,02,26,000 49,02,26,000 
24 Vigilance and Anti-Corruption Department. .....................--- Revenue 41,68,000 41,68,000 
25 Youth Affairs and Sports Department...................066 Capital 6,00,000 6,00,000 
29 Sales Tax, Other Taxes/Duties on Commodities and 
SOIVICES |: कट कस न मम कि Revenue 13,13,000 13,13,000 
30 Plannin “कक कि अप हम जप न कक ली तप Capital 290,21,89,000 290,21,89,000 
33 ome Guards टी व पट आम पी लक की रकम Capital 25,00,000 25,00,000 
34 Rehabilitation. .............ccscecesecesccesveeceveneoeeenseceees Revenue 5,00,00,000 5,00,00,000 
Capital 11,14,00,000 11,14,00,000 
38 Panchayat esiicdsiedstiawns cantina vneuwaoavegeeianednevewoateress Capital 2,99,000 2,99,000 
42 State Academy of Training.................. eee eee Capital 2,00,000 2,00,000 
46 Science and Technology.................cceceeeeeee eee eee ceee Capital 22,000 22,000 
48 Relief and Disaster Management....................0eeeeeeee Revenue 50,29,39,000 50,29,39,000 
49 Economics and छाध्वांशा05. ......... .... ७... ७७७०-७० ०००७ ------ Revenue 2,76,10,000 2,76,10,000 
TOTAL 1310,47,47,000 550,96,89, 000 1861,44,36,000 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

This Bill is introduced in pursuance of articles 204(1) and 205 of the 
Constitution of India, read with the Proclamation issued under article 356 of the 
Constitution in respect of the State of Manipur on the 13th February, 2025, to 
authorise payment and appropriation of certain further sums from and out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur of the moneys required to meet the 
supplementary expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the State of 
Manipur and the grants made by the Legislature for expenditure of the Government 
of Manipur for the financial year 2024-25. 


NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 207 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 


[Copy of letter No. 2(2)-B(S)/2025, dated 07 March, 2025 from Smt. Nirmala 
Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the Secretary- 
General, Lok Sabha] 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Manipur 
Appropriation Bill, 2025 to authorise payment and appropriation of certain further 
sums from and out of the Consolidated Fund of State of Manipur for the services of 
the financial year 2024-25, recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 207 of 
the Constitution read with clause (2) of article 205 thereof and the Proclamation 
dated 13.02.2025 under article 356 of the Constitution, the introduction of the 
Manipur Appropriation Bill, 2025 in Lok Sabha and also the consideration of the 
Bill. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


BiLt No. 38 or 2025 


A Bill to provide for the withdrawal of certain sums from and out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Manipur for the services of a part of the financial 
year 2025-26. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. This Act may be called the Manipur Appropriation (Vote on Account) 
Act, 2025. 


2. From and out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur there 
may be withdrawn sums not exceeding those specified in column 3 of the 


Schedule amounting in the aggregate to the sum of seventeen thousand nine 
hundred forty-six crore, seventy-eight lakh and eighty-eight thousand rupees 
towards defraying the several charges which will come in course of payment 
during the financial year 2025-26 in respect of the services specified in 
column 2 of the Schedule. 


Short title. 


Withdrawal of Rs. 
17946,78,88,000 
from and out of 
the Consolidated 
Fund of the State 
of Manipur for 
the financial year 
2025-26. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


Appropriation. 3. The sums authorised to be withdrawn from and out of the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Manipur by this Act shall be appropriated for the services and 
purposes expressed in the Schedule in relation to the said year. 


References 4. References to Departments in the Schedule are to such Departments as 
to Department existing immediately before the 18 day of March, 2025 and shall, on or after that 
in the Schedule. : : 
date be construed as references to the appropriate Departments as reconstituted 
from time to time. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 
THE SCHEDULE 
(See sections 2, 3 and 4) 
1 2 3 
No. of Services and purposes Sums not exceedin: 
Vote Voted by Charged on the 
/Appropr- Parliament Consolidated Total 
iation Fund 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
1 State Legislature's: 55722 /559285%6 ४०१४६ ८ ९५४६४ केतनेरेद २१३४० ४ Revenue 154,79,61,000 1,27,09,000 156,06,70,000 
Capital 5,67,50,000 हि 5,67,50,000 
2 Council: OF 40111 /: 1121 0 हक अर अत मय पटल मम Revenue 6,28,35,000 6,28,35,000 
Capital 40,00,000 40,00,000 
(76/78/6887: ८; «६-० ८६>-०८>न+वबक>्द +« लव न नह लेप रे हल + बन ७ > परेड न ज- denawleainen Revenue 4,23,60,000 4,23,60,000 
Capital 12,50,000 12,50,000 
Interest Payment and Debt $९/४८९८४........... ..... . . .. ..  -.- Revenue 604,29,61,000 604,29,61,000 
Capital 2908,06,08,500 2908,06,08,500 
Manipur Public Service Commission..........0..00ceeeeeees Revenue 3,67,94,500 3,67,94,500 
3 SOCHe 4 ५४००४ ०४०४४ va vives wales obstineccatioebiumended Revenue 66,54,83,500 91,90,000 67,46,73,500 
Capital 10,14,00,000 1,10,00,000 11,24,00,000 
4 Land RESOUICES: wc ;४६५४:२३ secemncaseddeaeesi asondines oneanoend od Revenue 69,30,95,500 69,30,95,500 
5 Finance 0 51 0111 0151 /1 पर कक आप पिन Revenue 1698,91,97,500 1698,91,97,500 
Capital 4,61,14,000 4,61,14,000 
6 WPAN SPO मर रा ch arena ee amntenaca sacle dosti aetna Revenue 14,44,35,500 14,44,35,500 
Capital 37,50,000 37,50,000 
7 PON CG isin gsathcvuea tava aedansaweniusanreea Make aledeebeieasakeaen Revenue 1385,69,98,500 1385,69,98,500 
Capital 172,60,40,500 172,60,40,500 
8 Public Works Department. ................0cceceeeeeeeeeee es Revenue 78,01,75,000 1,65,00,000 79,66,75,000 
Capital 629,50,96,500 2,50,00,000 632,00,96,500 
9 Information and Publicity.......... 00... ccceeeeeeeeeeeeeeee eens Revenue 7,60,89,500 7,60,89,500 
Capital 52,50,000 52,50,000 
10 Education Revenue 1552,95,37,500 1552,95,37,500 
Capital 57,20,05,000 57,20,05,000 
11 Medical, Health and Family Welfare Services............. Revenue 736,70,76,000 736,70,76,000 
Capital 59,73,23,500 59,73,23,500 
12 Municipal Administration, Housing and Urban 
Development: कि पी शी हम हल व Revenue 369,92,63,500 369,92,63,500 
Capital 60,72,61,500 60,72,61,500 
13 Labour and Employment.................0:eceeeeeeeee ee en ees Revenue 23,30,28,000 23,30,28,000 
Capital 2,62,50,000 2,62,50,000 
14 Department of Tribal Affairs and प|15..........................- Revenue 492,67,22,500 492,67,22,500 
Capital 19,85,68,000 19,85,68,000 
15 Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution.......... Revenue 75,59,98,000 75,59,98,000 
Capital 1,01,50,000 1,01,50,000 
16 CO-OpPEralOneesiaihidsscihediaceacia के ३३०७५ 0 7७४ ०३२क ३३०१४ 2१६ Revenue 14,77,83,000 14,77,83,000 
Capital 30,00,000 30,00,000 
17 A Gri CU tT Gs मत कम मम मा Revenue 159,30,56,500 159,30,56,500 
Capital 20,38,55,000 20,38,55,000 
18 Animal Husbandry and Veterinary including Dairy 
10: 101 111 Gas न पक हम मर हि कर Revenue 81,63,87,000 81,63,87,000 
Capital 7,19,00,000 7,19,00,000 
19 Environment and Forest...............0ceccececeeeee eee नजर Revenue 348,97,76,500 348,97,76,500 
Capital 49,87,50,000 49,87,50,000 
20 Community and Rural Development............ cece Revenue 1406,91,03,000 1406,91,03,000 
Capital 836,49,89,000 836,49,89,000 
21 Textiles, Commerce and Industries.....................06008 Revenue 79,20,84,000 79,20,84,000 
Capital 3,22,50,000 3,22,50,000 
22 Public Health Engineering.................:ceeeeeeereeeeees Revenue 60,05,10,000 60,05,10,000 
Capital 593,30,14,000 593,30,14,000 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [ParT पी. 
1 2 3 
No. of Services and purposes Sums not exceeding 
ne ae Voted by Charged on the Total 
pp: Parliament Consolidated 
priation Fund 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
23 1006-52 7२८ ४२४७४३ value cosavnenetsdarcea souiavcinexedounenosne Revenue 178,34,84,500 178,34,84,500 
Capital 70,00,00,000 70,00,00,000 
24 Vigilance and Anti-Corruption Department................ Revenue 3,51,34,000 3,51,34,000 
Capital 2,00,000 2,00,000 
25 Youth Affairs and Sports Department....................08 Revenue 45,38,99,000 45,38,99,000 
Capital 4,77,50,000 4,77,50,000 
26 Administration of 7प्रश०९...................--००००००००००००-०-- Revenue 51,86,22,000 32,45,50,000 84,31,72,000 
Capital 35,50,62,500 35,50,62,500 
27 BLOCH OM कि मिशन किक री न Was vata Der awen emcene stones teaenwites Revenue 13,77,75,500 13,77,75,500 
Capital 10,00,500 10,00,500 
28 State BX CIS 6 scocisgnaety dear Sah den eee आल आय न Revenue 6,32,69,000 6,32,69,000 
Capital 61,50,000 61,50,000 
29 Sales Tax, Other Taxes/Duties on Commodities and 
जय 251: कम tee sees sera आम कक हल न आज 2 Revenue 2,67,07,000 2,67,07,000 
Capital 17,50,000 17,50,000 
30 [| 0007! 0,580 ००७३ ३०४ करके दावे ॥ waestees becsemaeceaemabieuees Revenue 54,69,16,000 54,69,16,000 
Capital 488,17,55,500 488,17,55,500 
31 Fire Protection and Control.................ccceceeeee ee enees Revenue 12,58,65,000 12,58,65,000 
Capital 15,00,00,000 15,00,00,000 
32 Jail Sy 07007 1७ ०२३० मप्र रत 4 sees जज बे कर 2207 47% 72६ Revenue 21,71,93,000 21,71,93,000 
Capital 46,00,000 46,00,000 
33 Home Guards Revenue 28,68,87,500 28,68,87,500 
Capital 65,00,000 65,00,000 
34 Rehabilitation................cccececceceseeeeeeeeeeeaeenenenees Revenue 56,89,82,500 56,89,82,500 
Capital 4,00,500 4,00,500 
35 Print 11 कम मम मत मल cpaoseabevasuerns Revenue 2,85,15,000 2,85,15,000 
Capital 20,00,000 20,00,000 
36 Minor Irrigation Revenue 12,69,27,000 12,69,27,000 
Capital 146,65,42,500 146,65,42,500 
37 Fisheries Revenue 37,82,71,000 37,82,71,000 
Capital 47,50,000 47,50,000 
38 Panchayat मम पतन Revenue 78,88,88,500 78,88,88,500 
Capital 1,50,500 1,50,500 
39 Sericulture Revenue 43,33,27,000 43,33,27,000 
Capital 15,00,000 15,00,000 
40 Water Resources Department............... cece ee scene ee eens Revenue 33,02,10,000 33,02,10,000 
Capital 304,34,14,500 304,34,14,500 
41 ArPand Cul wiicisss..daiweseasagadessne sense utedGesaavendearss Revenue 25,64,62,500 25,64,62,500 
Capital 71,00,000 71,00,000 
42 State Academy of Training................cccececeeneeeeeeeees Revenue 4,96,50,000 4,96,50,000 
Capital 60,00,000 60,00,000 
43 Horticulture and Soil Conservation..................0000008 Revenue 52,22,45,500 52,22,45,500 
Capital 2,34,50,000 2,34,50,000 
44 SOCial) Weltare wasde4x se शक कम मम मम कह तह हम लक Revenue 551,89,12,500 551,89,12,500 
Capital 20,28,60,000 20,28,60,000 
45 Tourism Revenue 14,08,25,500 14,08,25,500 
Capital 1,03,52,000 1,03,52,000 
46 Science and Technology.............scecececeeeeeeeeeeeeeneese Revenue 2,92,27,500 2,92,27,500 
Capital 87,00,000 87,00,000 
47 Minorities and Other Backward Classes and Scheduled 
Castes Departments i: saniaes v.idouaceeaarsnuaeesiricdienteeseians Revenue 46,45,57,000 46,45,57,000 
Capital 220,35,00,000 220,35,00,000 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


39 


1 2 3 
No. of Services and purposes Sums not exceeding 
Ye ae Voted by Charged on the Total 
pp: Parliament Consolidated 
priation Fund 
Rs. Rs. Rs. 
48 Relief and Disaster 132०10ा .............. ... renee Revenue 184,88,70,000 184,88,70,000 
Capital 1,07,50,000 1,07,50,000 
49 Economics and Statistics...............cccecseeeeeeeeeeeeeeees Revenue 9,88,93,000 9,88,93,000 
Capital 61,50,000 61,50,000 
50 Information Technology..............csceceeecec eee ee teen eee Revenue 40,42,79,500 40,42,79,500 
Capital 33,34,66,500 33,34,66,500 


14386,49,65,000 


3560,29, 23,000 


17946,78,88,000 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 2] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

This Bill is introduced in pursuance of articles 204(1) and 206 of the 
Constitution of India, read with the Proclamation issued under article 356 of the 
Constitution in respect of the State of Manipur on the 13th February, 2025, to 
provide for the appropriation out of the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur 
of the moneys required to meet the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund 
of the State of Manipur and the grants made in advanced by the Lok Sabha in 
respect of the estimated expenditure of the Government of Manipur for a part of 
the financial year 2025-26. 


NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 


PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 207 OF THE 
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA 


[Copy of letter No. 2(2)-B(S)/2025, dated 07 March, 2025 from Smt. Nirmala 
Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs to the Secretary-General, 
Lok Sabha] 


The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Manipur 
Appropriation (Vote on Account) Bill, 2025 to authorise payment and 
appropriation of certain sums from and out of the Consolidated Fund of State of 
Manipur for the services of the financial year 2025-26, recommends under clauses 
(1) and (3) of article 207 of the Constitution read with article 206 thereof and the 
Proclamation dated 13.02.2025 under article 356 of the Constitution, the 
introduction of the Manipur Appropriation (Vote on Account) Bill, 2025 in Lok 
Sabha and also the consideration of the Bill. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 
Secretary General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


MGIPMRND—734GI(S4)— 12-03-2025. 


