रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003—05 REGD. NO. D. L. (N) 04/0007/2003—05 


जीरत = sida 
Che Gazette of India 


GSH. -ST.Wet.-A.-5092025-2660 
CG-DL-W-5092025-2660 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


सं. 34] नई दिल्‍ली, अगस्त 3I FATA 6, 2025, शनिवार/भाद्र 9--भाद्र 5, 947 
No. 34] NEW DELHI, AUGUST 3.—SEPTEMBER 6, 2025, SATURDA Y/BHADRA 9- BHADRA 5, 947 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग Il— aus 3---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 


विदेश मन्त्रालय 
(सी.पी.वी. प्रभाग) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 3 सितम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4584--राजनयिक और कोंसुलीय अधिकारी (शपथ एवं फीस) के अधिनियम, 948 की धारा 2 के 
खंड (क) के अनुसरण में वैधानिक आदेश। 


एतदद्वारा, केंद्र सरकार, सितम्बर 03, 2025 से कांसुलर सेवाएं के निर्वहन करने के लिए विदेश में भारतीय 
मिशनों/पोस्टों में सहायक कांसुलर अधिकारियों के रूप में इस मंत्रालय के नीचे उल्लिखित अधिकारियों की नियुक्ति करता 
हैः 


क्रम | अधिकारी का नाम और पद मिशन / पोस्ट जिसमें सहायक कांसुलर अधिकारी के 
सं. रूप में नियुक्त किया गया है 
| श्री ओमप्रकाश राबड़,सहायक अनुभाग अधिकारी भारतीय दूतावास, अबु धाबी 


5628 GI/2025 (5943) 


5944 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


2 श्री चैतन्य यादव,सहायक अनुभाग अधिकारी भारतीय दूतावास, कोनाक्री 


3 श्री रोहित गुप्तासहायक अनुभाग अधिकारी भारत के प्रधान कोंसलावास, न्यूयॉर्क 


[फा. सं. टी. 4330/04/2025(35)] 


TAT कुमार पाल, निदेशक (सीपीवी) 


MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(CPV Division) 
New Delhi, the 3rd September, 2025 


9.0. 584.—Statutory Order in pursuance of clause (a) of the Section 2 of the Diplomatic and Consular 
Officers (Oaths and fees) Act, 948 (4] of 048), the Central Government hereby appoints the below mentioned 
officials of this Ministry, as Assistant Consular Officers in Indian Missions/Posts abroad to perform Consular services 
with effect from September 03, 2025: 


5. Name & Rank of the Officer Mission/Post wherein appointed as Assistant 
No Consular Officer 


Shri Omprakash Rabad, Assistant Section Officer Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi 
2 Shri Chaitanya Yadav, Assistant Section Officer Embassy of India, Conakry 


3 Shri Rohit Gupta, Assistant Section Officer Consulate General of India, New York 


[F. No. T.4330/0/2025 (35)] 
NABA KUMAR PAL, Director (CPV) 


कार्मिक, लोक शिकायत और पेंशन मंत्रालय 
(कार्मिक और प्रशिक्षण विभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 27 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. 4585.--केंद्रीय सरकार, दिल्‍ली विशेष पुलिस cama अधिनियम, 7946 (946 का केन्द्रीय 
अधिनियम 25) की धारा 5 की उप-धारा (7) सपठित धारा 6 द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए केरल राज्य सरकार 
की अधिसूचना सं. जी.ओ. (एमएस.) सं. 43/2025/गृह, दिनांक 02.03.2025, गृह (एम) विभाग, तिरुवनंतपुरम 
(एस.आर.ओ.संख्या-239/2025) के माध्यम से जारी सम्मति से श्री किरण पी.पी., प्रबंध साझेदार, मेसर्स कैट्रिक्स 
ल्यूमिनैन्ट्स &सोलर Peers, श्री अजय मोहन, श्री दीपक धर्मापालन और श्री आगस्टीन चैंडी मेसर्स कैट्रिक्स ल्यूमिनैन्ट्स 
& सोलर सिस्टम्स के साझेदारों, और अज्ञात लोक सेवकों और अन्य, यदि कोई हो, के विरुद्ध भारतीय दंड संहिता की 
धाराएँ 420बी सपठित धाराएं 420 और 468, 474 सपठित धाराएं 468, 406 और 409 तथा भ्रष्टाचार निवारण 


अधिनियम, 7988 की धारा 43 की उपधारा (2) सपठित धारा 3 की उपधारा (॥) का खण्ड (सी) & धारा 43 की 
उपधारा () का खण्ड (डी) के अंतर्गत दंडनीय अपराधों और उसके मूल अपराधों तथा उक्त अधिनियम के तहत दंडनीय 
अपराधों को कारित करने और इस मामले के संदर्भ में, संपूर्ण केरल राज्य के अंदर, उन्हीं तथ्यों से उत्पन्न उसी संव्यवहार में 
कारित किन्हीं अन्य अपराधों का अन्वेषण करने के लिए दिल्‍ली विशेष पुलिस carga के सदस्यों की शक्तियों और 
क्षेत्राधिकार का विस्तार समस्त केरल राज्य में करती है। 


[फा. सं. 228/64/2025-एवीडी-][] 


सत्यम श्रीवास्तव, अवर सचिव 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5945 


MINISTRY OF PERSONNEL, PUBLIC GRIEVANCES AND PENSIONS 
(Department of Personnel and Training) 
New Delhi, the 27th August, 2025 


S.O. 585.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (l) of section 5 read with section 6 of the 
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 946 (Central Act 25 of !946), the Central Government with the consent of 
the State Government of Kerala, issued vide Notification No.G.O.(Ms.) No.43/2025/HOME, dated 02.03.2025, Home 
(M) Department, Thiruvananthapuram (S.R.O.No. 239/2025),hereby extends the powers and jurisdiction of the 
members of the Delhi Special Police Establishment in the wholeState of Kerala for investigation of offences 
punishable under section |20B read with sections 420 and 468,47] read with sections 468, 406 and 409 of Indian 
Penal Code and sub section (2) of Section |3 read with clause (c) of sub section () of section 3 & clause (d) of sub 
section (l) of section 3 of Prevention of Corruption Act,!988 and substantive offences thereof against Shri Kiran 
P.P., Managing Partner, M/s CatrixLuminants& Solar Systems, Shri Ajay Mohan, Shri Deepak Dharmapalan and Shri 
Augustine Chandy Partners of M/s CatrixLuminants& Solar systems, and unknown public servants and others, if any, 
for commission of offences punishable under the said Acts and any other offense committed in the course of 
transaction arising out of the same fact, in regard to this case, within the whole State of Kerala. 


[F. No. 228/64/2025-AVD-I] 
SATYAM SRIVASTAVA, Under Secy. 


श्रम और रोजगार मंत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 23 मई, 2025 


का.आ. 4586.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी बी एम बी के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह- श्रम न्यायालय, चंडीगढ़ -2 के tae (संदर्भ Wea 73/20I8) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 47/04,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं.एल- 230(2/32/208- आई.आर.सी.एम-ा] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 
New Delhi, the 23rd May, 2025 


S.O. 586.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 73/208) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BBMB and their workmen received by the Central Government on 7/04/2025. 


[No. L-2302/32/208— IR (CM-ID)] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, 
CHANDIGARH. 


Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 
ID No.73/20I8 
Registered on:-!.2.208 


Lekh Ram son of Sh. Gokal Ram, R/o Village Rouna, PO Jagatkhana, Tehsil Nainadevi, Distt. Bilaspur, Himachal 
Pradesh. 


beveeeeeeeeee-Applicant/Workman 


5946 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Versus 
l. The Chairman, Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector !9-B, Chandigarh-l6009. 
2s The Chief Engineer, Bhakra Beas Management Board, BSL Project, Sundernagar-!75038. 

.....Respondents/Management 
Present:- Mr. S C Gupta, AR for workman. 
Sh. Ravinder Rana (Law Officer), AR for Management. 
Award 
Passed on:- 0.04.2025 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/32/20l8 (IR(CM-II)) dated 9..208 under clause (d) 
of sub-section (/) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter called the Act), 
has referred the following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal: - 


“Whether the action of management of BBMB in not accepting the demand of Sh. Lekh Ram S/o Sh. 
Gokal Ram for deeming/considering him in continuous service upto age of superannuation and 
resultantly entitled for consequential benefits is legal, just and valid? If not, to what relief, the workman 
concerned is entitled to and from which date?” 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project {hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year 4962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar. After passing of Pb. Re-Organization Act, 966 (hereinafter called “Re-Organization 
Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas Construction Board (hereinafter called “BCB”). The workman was 
employed by BSL Project, Sundernagar on 04.02.972. The workman who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-) 
become the employee of Bhakra Beas Management Board(hereinafter called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso () of 
Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of Re-organization Act and the workman become the employee of the Centre 
Government under the management of B.B.M.B. from 5.05.976. The workmen of this project were considered as 
the employees of the Central Government by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Jaswant Singh and others 
Versus Union of India and others (AIR 7980 Supreme Court page /75) . The workman has completed 240 days in 
every calendar year and was not interrupted till his retrenchment. The employer made a bulk retrenchment of project 
employees in the year 977 and 978 and also in stages thereafter till [984. The workman was also retrenched by the 
employer on 24.08.977 and copy of discharge certificate was issued by the office of Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar in accordance with provision of the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, the management 
appointed fresh workmen/employees, violating Section 25-F, Section 25-H, Rule 77 & 78 of the I.D. Act, 947. The 
BSL Project is an industrial establishment as per Section 25 L of the Act. This action of the management also violates 
the directions of Hon'ble Supreme Court as mentioned in Para 40 of the case of Jaswant Singh (supra). No notice as 
per Rule 78 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is statutory requirement, has been issued to the 
workman. Not only this no seniority list as per law was prepared and principle of last come first go was violated by 
the management at the time of retrenchment of the workman, which also violates Section 25G of the Act. 


2: It is also maintained that similar matters have been decided by the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court 
vide its judgments dated 7.5.2007 in CWP Nos.306-64 of 2006, 3069 of 2006,3073-3083 of 2006,3085-3087 of 
2006,3090-337 of 2006 and 348-349 of 2006. These judgments of the Hon'ble High Court have been upheld by 
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case titled Bhakra Beas Management Board Vs. Biri Singh and others etc. in SLP 
Nos. 76939-770072 of 2007 vide of orders dated 8.7.204. Vide order dated 8.7.20i4 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has 
ordered that the matter to be taken up before the Industrial Tribunal. Many of the workmen have already taken up the 
matters before the learned Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court No.l and 2 Chandigarh. It may also 
not be out of context to mention here that the present matter is covered by the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme 
Court in the case titled as Raghubir Singh V/s General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Hissar reported in JT 20I4 
(९) SC ॥68. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may kindly be allowed and 
retrenchment/discharge order dated 24.08.977 of the workman be held illegal since workman has already retired in 
January 2007, so he may be released consequential benefits till date. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(.) of the Re-organization Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in accordance with the provisions of the Act and settlement in this 
behalf. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on 
account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present 
management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also maintained that construction of Beas Project was 
undertaken by the Irrigation Department Punjab Govt. prior to the re-organization of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 
0i..966. After re-organization the work of BSL(P) was taken over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states 
of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organization 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5947 


Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in relation to which the construction has been 
completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted 
under Section 79() of the Re-organization Act. It is further stated under Section 80(5) of the Re-organization Act that 
BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the 
Re-organization Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. Thus, the workman never remained the employee of 
management. Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, 
titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India &Anr., /979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing 
them in BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been 
denied and it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal 
enforceable right to claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. A rejoinder was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 
Evidence of workman: 


6. The workman has examined himself as WW and filed his affidavit in evidence as +5.४४५७०।/७ and has been 
cross-examined by the law officer of management. He also tendered document 9.४४ |/] Discharge Certificate and 
AR for workman closed evidence on 06.0.2023. 


Evidence of respondents:- 


7. The respondents have filed affidavit of Er. Dinesh Kumar son of Sh. Hawa Singh, Executive Engineer, 
Balancing Reservoir Slit Clearance & Plant Design Division, BBMB Sundernagar, who filed his affidavit in evidence 
as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of workman. He also tendered photocopy of 
Service Record of workman as Ex.MWI/B and management evidence was closed on 6.0.2024 and the matter was 
fixed for arguments. 


Submissions of Management: 


8. While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the respondents contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year 960. BCB was constituted in the year [966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organization Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organization Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee on 04.02.972 and was retrenched on 24.08.977. All similar work charged employees including 
the present workman were engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 984 therefore, the workmen cannot 
be termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. 
Moreover, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., 
2929 SCC 440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by 
the management and also by the award 2-C of the year 97! before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT- 
Chandigarh between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the 
gazette on 5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


9. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 24.08.977 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97] decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial peace 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put 0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or 
transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first 
be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous 
service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical 
fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected.” 


0. Because the present workman had not completed |0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workman was retrenched on 
24.08. [977 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 


5948 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


25-H of the Act and his claim is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition in the year 208. To 
support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, 
AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 32 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 2078, decided on 03.I2.20I8 where the Hon’ble Himachal Pradesh High 
Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the Act does not prescribed time 
limit for referring such dispute. AR for respondents also relied upon the judgment passed by Hon'ble High Court of 
Himachal Pradesh Shimla in CWP _No.3057 of 2023 titled as Ghunghriya Ram versus Himachal Pradesh State 
Electricity Board Limited and others and judgment passed by Hon'ble High Court, Madras in WP Nos.5556 of 2027 
titled as Mr. D Poomaran versus The General Manager, Bharat Petorloum Corporation Ltd. and others, wherein it 
is stated that as per Section 2-A(3) of the Act, the order should be challenged within 3 years from the date of 
dismissal, discharge, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified un sub-section () of Section 2-A. 
In the present case workman was engaged on 04.02.!972 and was discharged on 24.08.977 and he has sought re- 
employment after 32 years which was held to be highly time barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is 
time barred. Workman was discharged on 24.08.977 and thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour 
Conciliation Officer. 


Submissions of applicant:- 

ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
24.08. [977 illegally and he was issued discharge certificate ४४/५७४।/| by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB Sundernagar. 
He referred to Section 25-H of the Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He further has drawn 
the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in view of Section 25-H 
of the Act by the management. He was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the 
workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957 (hereinafter called Industrial Rule). 
Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the 
appellant-establishment is required to place on the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be 
retrenched but nothing has been done in this regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to 
Rule 78 which provides that as and when any vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given 
registered notice but nothing was done by the management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no 
limitation period has been prescribed under the Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section (]) of Section 
0 of the Act. 


Findings:- 


2. I have given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for 
the respondents. 
3. The respondents relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another (supra), 


which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners was employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the Bhakra Nangal Scheme. 


4. In respect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled to 
the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7965, they may make 
representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this Court to 
grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the aforesaid 
rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- permanent service 
under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be transferred to the services 
of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas Management Board. Lastly, the 
proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not offend against the guarantee of equality contained in 
articles ॥4 and 6 of the Constitution, since the petitioners and the Deputationists belong to two different and 
distinct classes.” 


5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“47.4 work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including the 
wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees who are 
borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the estimated cost of 
the work. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5949 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically come 
to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do not get 
any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or any benefits 
under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and are 
entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from 
that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment and modification. 
The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant like the other 
petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 978 shows that offers of alternative employment were made to 
the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last come, first go' 
has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact the work-charged 
employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 25/60) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, ''Lay-off and Retrenchment", have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, about 
26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the workmen 
and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), 
New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 7947, All the 72 unions of which the work- 
charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation proceedings. By reason of section 
483) (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding is 
binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to which the dispute relates, whether they 
were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Jatin 
Chakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not even necessary, in order to bind the work men to 
the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show that they belonged to the union which took part in 
the conciliation proceedings, since the policy underlying section 726 of the Act is to give an extended 
operation to such settlements. In the instant case, all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the 
work-charged establishment were parties to the conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind 
all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-C of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which the 
workmen "'virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the aforesaid 
award dated May 75, 7974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, involving a 
burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected between 
them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and have 
accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 7974 they are not entitled to any rights apart from 
those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ४०.7246 of 7979 which is filed to challenge 
the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of over four and half 
years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are 
engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an 
end on the completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the 
provisions contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which 
even contracts of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides 
that in the conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on 
Beas Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived 
between the workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi under Section !2 of the Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work 
charge employees who are working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that 
apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference 
no.2-C in an industrial dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with 
which we are concerned and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. 


5950 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the last para 47 itself specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May 
5, 974 and they were entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held as 200/0(3) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 
and Development Authority Chandigarh and Another wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 


produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 
application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 24.02.2025 of this Tribunal, respondents were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the !2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section |2 of Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. On 
3.03.2025, Mr. Ravinder Rana, Law Officer appeared on behalf of respondents and stated that aforesaid settlement is 
not traceable. It is also added here that in similar decided matters, wherein number of opportunities were given to the 
respondents to produce the said settlement, however, despite of availing specific directions, the said policy was not 
produced. Those cases are ID No.247/2005 titled as Dharam Singh Versus BBMB and another, ID /४५०. /22/2005 


titled as Narpat Ram versus Bhakra Beas Management Board and another and other similar matters. As such 
adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is workcharged. The 
institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime unavoidable. These workmen 
are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the execution of a specified work for which 
they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the services of such workman automatically come to 
an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged employee does not get any relief under the Payment of 
Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any 
retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 7947 it was not usual to have project, construction of 
which required a number of years to complete but after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic 
and the Government having taken in hand five year plans for development of the country there are various 
schemes involving the construction of works for a period extending over several years as is the case of the 
instant Project. It commenced in 962 and more than ॥2 years having passed the completion might take 
another few years. In such situation it seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular 
employee, spent the part of his life ranging from 5-70 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road 
and must be assured some benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the 
employer could not compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been 
engaged is completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the 
Government or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman 
for all time to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has in my opinion 
to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive Principles enunciated in 
part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which justice, social and economic could 
be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the duty of an adjudicator of industrial 
disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be guided by the fundamentals contained in 
this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the economic capacity of the employer and 
Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every citizen do in our present economy. It is not 
possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman employed by the respondent management are 
drawn from different states out of which I am informed about 6/70 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 
from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen 
are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from Kerala. The board has by and large been consistently following 
the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness 
allowance. It is only with regard to categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by 
the erstwhile United State of Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations 
of its own standing committee. Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab policy. 
The state government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services of work 
charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for 70 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government. The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 595[ 


irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state the 
services of those who had put in 70 years or more would have been regularized the respondent management 
too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the services of at least of 
those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have created awkward situation as 
the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this respect. Moreover financial implications 
and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated above, would have directed that the services of those of the workman who have 
been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the other problems arising 
from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost sight of The Central 
Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, Rajasthan Haryana and 
Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture. Several aspects of the question were discussed with the 
workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a formula evolved to which the workman 
virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is 
work out, honestly stated. No doubt, what is referred to me is the matter of regularization of the services of 
work charge employees, but the directions that I am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser 
relief than claimed by the workmen. The management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace 
and is anxious to secure employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is 
accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months 
thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or 
transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first 
be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous 
service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical 
fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension that 
near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said that a 
suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore necessary to be 
employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further directed that 
category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the completion of the Project 
without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is made it will have no 
consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier trade provided the vacancy 
relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance 
staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also 
the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or 
work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need for 
workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned 
Presiding Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged 
employees after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT that State Govt. who are 
beneficiary under the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re- 
employed at any other project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where 
there is a need of workmen of those trades. 


2i. It is specific case of the workman that respondents also appointed fresh workmen, but preference was not 
given to him, which is in clear violation of section 25-H of the Act. In this regard, it is pointed out that no pointed 
cross examination has been done by the law officer of the respondents, meaning thereby, the respondents have 
admitted that they have engaged fresh workmen but preference was not given to the workman. 


22, Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the 
retrenchment of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are 
reproduced below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of their 
service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are to 
be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the premises of 
the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those vacancies by 
registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefore, to the address 
given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall be 
sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in the list 


5952 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation on 
the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the employer, 
does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to him by the 
employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be filled on any 
subsequent occasion. ] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (/), the employer shall also inform the trade 
unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names of the 
retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where an 
intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


23. Moreover, a perusal of cross examination of Er. Dinesh Kumar (॥५७४]) reveals that the workman was never 
called for re-appointment at any point of time and as per aforesaid Rule 77 & 78, the workman was required to be 
given notice. Moreover, no explanation has been given that after the retrenchment of the workman, other persons 
were not recruited by the management, which is in violation of Section 25-H of the Act. 


24. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work whether 
in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen of those 
trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


25. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


26. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the 
BBMB but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the 
BBMB. Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in 
the year !966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per 
Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organization Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of 
various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organization Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case (supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 


27. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, 
the same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5953 


reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 208. So far as case laws on the point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case 
as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jaswant Singh case (Supra). Moreover, limitation was added in Section 
2A of the Act in the year 20I0 (45.09.20l0) and workman was dismissed from service on 24.08.!977 and AR for 
respondents has failed to bring this fact that the aforesaid provision was retrospective. 


28. It is added here that in the present case, the reference was made under clause (d) of sub-section (I) of Section 
0 of the Act. It is not case filed under Section 2-A of the Act. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case titled as 


Raghubir Singh V/s General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Hissar (supra) has held as follow: 


“42. It is an undisputed fact that the dispute was raised by the workman after he was acquitted in the criminal case 
which was initiated at the instance of the respondent. Raising the industrial dispute belatedly and getting the same 
referred from the State Government to the Labour Court is for justifiable reason and the same is supported by law 
laid down by this Court in Calcutta Dock Labour Board (supra). Even assuming for the sake of the argument that 
there was a certain delay and latches on the part of the workman in raising the industrial dispute and getting the 
same referenced for adjudication, the Labour Court is statutorily duty bound to answer the points of dispute referred 
to it by adjudicating the same on merits of the case and it ought to have moulded the relief appropriately in favour of 
the workman. That has not been done at all by the Labour Court. Both the learned single Judge as well as the 
Division Bench of the High Court in its Civil Writ Petition and the Letters Patent Appeal have failed to consider this 
important aspect of the matter.”’ 


Even Hon'ble Supreme Court in para no.3! of the said judgment has held as follow: 


ढ#ड7, The rejection of the reference by the Labour Court by answering the additional issue no. 2 regarding the delay 
latches and limitation without adjudicating the points of dispute referred to it on the merits amounts to failure to 
exercise its statutory power under Section //4 of the Act. Therefore, we have to interfere with the impugned award of 
the Labour Court and the judgment & order of the High Court as it has erroneously confirmed the award of the 
Labour Court without examining the relevant provisions of the Act and decisions of this Court referred to supra on 
the relevant issue regarding the limitation.” 


29. Hon'ble Supreme Court has also referred in the said case decision of Ajaib Singh v. The Sirhind Co- 


Operative Marketing Cum- Processing Service Society Limited & Anr.(AIR /999 Supreme Court ॥357), wherein, 
Court has opined that relief cannot be denied to the workman merely on the ground of delay, stating that:- 


#॥09, It follows, therefore, that the provisions of Article /37 of the Schedule to Limitation Act, /963 are not 
applicable to the proceedings under the act and that the relief under it cannot be denied to the workman merely 
on the ground of delay. The plea of delay if raised by the employer is required to be proved as a matter of fact 
by showing the real prejudice and not as a merely hypothetical defence. No reference to the labour court can be 
generally questioned on the ground of delay alone. Even in a case where the delay in shown to be existing, the 
tribunal, labour court or board, dealing with the case can appropriately mould the relief by declining to grant 
back wages to the workman till the date he raised the demand regarding his illegal retrenchment/ termination 
or dismissal. 


30. In view of the aforesaid observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the delay was not thus fettled to the case of 
the appellant. It is also added here that so far as the case Ram Chand Vs. The BBMB and another (supra), 
Ghunghriya Ram versus Himachal Pradesh State Electricity Board Limited and others (supra) and Mr. D 
Poomaran versus The General Manager, Bharat Petorloum Corporation Ltd. and others (supra) referred by 


the AR for respondents are concerned, those cases were filed by the workman under Section 2-A of the Act, 
which specifically provides limitation of 3 years from the date of dismissal or retrenchment. Section 0(l) of 
the Act specifically provide that appropriate government may refer any industrial dispute at any time, whereas 
the same is conspicuously absent in sub-section (3) of Section 2A, which could clearly depict the intention of 
the legislature namely, it had deliberately imposed limitation period under sub-section (3) of Section 2A. Thus, 
period of limitation cannot be considered. So far as the case law titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & 
Anr. Vs. Sham Lal (supra), the same is not attracted to the facts and circumstance of the present case in view of 
the judgment Raghubir_ Singh V/s General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Hissar (supra), whose relevant 


paras are reproduced above. Therefore, it cannot be said that case of applicant was beyond limitation. 


3]: However, it is added that workman in his cross examination has admitted that he was served with discharge 
certificate as well as notice at the time of his retrenchment but he did not recollect how much the amount was. So, 
there is no breach of Section 25 F of the Act. 


32. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97l and Rule 77 
& 78 of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left 
is to compensate the workman in term of money. 


33. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 


5954 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
i. Workcharged employee who has completed 5 years of service or more shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along 
with interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of amount. 


il. Workcharged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization of amount. 


ili. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 
case. 
34. The present work charged workman was employed on 04.02.972 and was retrenched on 24.08.977 as 


mentioned in Discharge Certificate (5.४४५७।/|) issued by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB Sundernagar, and has 
worked for 5 years and about 6 months (more than 5 years), so he is entitled of Rs.50,000/- along with interest @9% 
per annum from the date of moving the application till its realization. 


35. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 
36. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 4587.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 5/2003) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. Tet-20072/77/2002-3r8. 38. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


9.0. 587.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 5/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Dhanbad- as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of BCCL. 
and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/7/2002— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 5/2003 


Employer in relation to the management of Sijua Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Advocate 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 0/08/2025 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5955 


AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-2002/7/2002-IR(C-T) dated 0/!2/2002 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Sijua Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Branch Secretary, Rashtriya 
Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Moodidih Colliery, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


क्या राष्ट्रीय कोलियरी मजदूर संघ की भारत कोकिंग कोल लिमिटेड, सिजुओआ क्षेत्र के प्रबंधतंत्र से माँग कि श्री सुकुमार 
कोले को उनसे कनिष्ठ कर्मकारों की पदोन्‍नति की तारीख से टैक्नीकल एण्ड सुपरवाइजर ग्रेड में पदोन्‍नत किया जाये 
उचित एवं न्यायसंगत है? यदि हाँ तो कर्मकार किस राहत के पात्र हैं तथा किस तारीख से?” 
2. On receiving order no. 7.-2002/] 7/2002-२((7-) dated 0/2/2002 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 5 of 2003 was registered on 0.0!.2003 and thereafter 


the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. Even after issuance of notices, none appeared on behalf of the workman/union. It further appears from the case 
record that after a long gap regd. notices were issued to both the parties on 6.08.202] but the registered notice of 
workman/union was returned with remarks “Not Traced” and thereafter no further step was taken from the side of the 
workman/union, whereas Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate appeared from the side of the management and filed his 
letter of authority but the workman/union never appeared before the Tribunal since 0.0.2003. 


4. On perusal of the entire case record it is transpires that the workman/union never appeared before this Tribunal 
for a period of 22 years which shows that the workman/union has no interest in this case and therefore, for the ends of 
justice, this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 


5. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. (588.—sileifre 9 विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor सीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्यागिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 406/2002) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49,//08,// 2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. Tet-20042/63/2002-sr8 3. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 588.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 06/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
CCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/63/2002— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL २०., DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 () (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 


5956 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Reference Case No. 06/2002 
Employer in relation to the management of N.K. Area of M/s. CCL, Ranchi. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Advocate 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-2002/63/2002-IR(C-IT) dated 07/0/2002 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of N.K. Area of M/s. CCL and their workman through (i)Area Secretary, Rashtriya 
Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Ranchi (ii) Chairman, Janta Mazdoor Sangh, Ranchi (iii) Area Secretary, CCL, Colliery 
Karamchari Sangh, Ranchi (iv) Zonal Secretary, NCOEA, Ranchi (v) Secretary, United Coal Workers Congress 
Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 

“Whether the management of N.K. Area of M/s Central Coalfields Ltd. is justified in introducing 

staggered weekly off in place of the existing Sunday weekly off? If so, what directions are required to 

be issued for smooth functioning of the new system?” 
2. On receiving order no. L-2002/63/2002-IR(C-IT) dated 07/0/2002 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 06 of 2002 was registered on 8.l0.2002 and 
thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with 
relevant documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 
3 Even after issuance of notices, none appeared on behalf of the unions. It further appears from the case record 
that after a long gap regd. notices were issued to both the parties on !6.08.202! but the three registered notices of 
unions were returned with remarks “Incomplete Address”, “खलारी A राष्ट्रीय कोलियरी मजदूर संघ नहीं है वापस” and 
“Insufficient Address.” Thereafter no further step were taken from the side of the unions whereas Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. 
Advocate appeared from the side of the management and filed his letter of authority but the unions never appeared 
before the Tribunal since 8.0.2002. 
4. On perusal of the entire case record it is transpires that the unions never appeared before this Tribunal for a period 
of 23 years which shows that the unions have no interest in this case and therefore, for the ends of justice, this case 
deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 
५ Hence 
ORDERED 
that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 589.—aiteifre 9 विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार डी.वी.सी.बेर्मो माइंस के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में orale सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - 8A न्यायालय, Adate- के पंचाट (संदर्भ 
संख्या 446/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं,. एल-42042/425/2002-आई.आर.(सी.एम-)|] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5957 


New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 589.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 6/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
D.V.C.Bermo Mines. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025 


[No. L-4202/25/2002— IR (CM-D] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 6/2002 
Employer in relation to the management of D.V.C. Bermo Mines, Bokaro. 
AND. 


Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- None. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 28/07/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-4202/25/2002-(IR(CM-ID) dated 30/l0/2002 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of D.V.C. Bermo Mines and their workman through Secretary, DVC Karamchari Sangh, 
Bermo Mines Units for adjudication by this Tribunal: 

“Whether the denial of management to give the regular employment to the workers who were 

supplying the water regularly in difference places of premises of Bermo coal mines of DVC is 

justified? If not, to what relief the workmen concerned are entitled to?” 
2. On receiving order no. L-4202/25/2002-(IR(CM-II)) dated 30/0/2002 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. !l6 of 2002 was registered on 8.!i.2002 and 
thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with 
relevant documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 
3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities, W/S and subsequently 
rejoinder. It further appears that after 202 this case was put up after a long gap on 05.08.202 and registered notices 
were issued to both the parties but neither the workman nor management appeared before this Tribunal. The 
registered notice sent to the Secretary, D.V.C. Karamchari Sangh, Bermo Mines Units, returned with endorsement 
“No such person in this address” and both the parties did not appear since the year 202! which shows that the they 
have lost their interest in this case and therefore, this Tribunal is of the opinion that the case deserves to be dismissed 
due to non prosecution. 
4. Hence, 
ORDERED 

that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 590.—silenfie विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 85/2003) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49,/08,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 
[सं. Tet-2002/89/2003-sr8 3. (सी.एम-)] 


5958 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 
S.O. 590.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 85/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 
[No. L-2002/89/2003— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 85/2003 
Employer in relation to the management of Mugma Area of M/s. E.C.L., Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- None. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD. 

In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (l4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/89/2003-IR(C-I) dated 9/08/2003 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer 
i.e. management of Mugma Area of M/s. E.C.L and their workman through General Secretary, Koyla Mazdoor Union, 
Asansol, Barddhaman for adjudication by this Tribunal: 

“Whether the action of the Management of Rajpura Colliery under Mugma Area of M/s ECL in 

denying employment to Sri Mahendra Baratia as the dependent son of Late Nari Baratia is fair and 

justified? If not to what relief is the said dependant entitled?” 
2. On receiving order no. L-2002/89/2003-IR(C-I) dated 9/08/2003 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 85 of 2003 was registered on 06/3. [0.2003 and 
thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with 
relevant documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 
3. Even after issuance of notice, none appeared from either side. The case record shows that this case was put up after 
a long gap on 7.09.202] and the regd. notices were issued to both parties but even then no one appeared. Thereafter 
again regd. notices were issued to both the parties on 30.05.2025 and the same was returned with endorsement 
“Addressee Left”. 
4. It transpires from the case record that both the parties neither appeared before the Tribunal since the year 2003 nor 
any step were taken on their behalf which makes it clear that they have lost their interest in this case and therefore, this 
Tribunal is of the opinion that this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 
5. Hence, 
ORDERED 
that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 
SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. 4594.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5959 


केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-। के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 6/200l) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-20042/67/2004-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


9.0. 59.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 6/200l) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/67/200l— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL ]२०0.।,०पत५ ४३ ७५७ 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 6/200I 


Employer in relation to the management of Katras Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Md. Faishal Asstt. Manager 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/67/200i-IR(C-T) dated /07/200l has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Katras Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Vice President, Rashtriya 
Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the management of East Katras Colliery of M/s BCCL in dismissing Sri Somar 
Mahato No.2 from the service of the company w.e.f. 30.09.92 is justified? If not, to what relief is the 
concerned workman entitled?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-200i2/67/200l-IR(C-I) dated /07/200l Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. !6! of 200l was registered on 09.08.200I and 
thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with 
relevant documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities, W/S and subsequently 
rejoinder. It further appears that after 2006 this case was put up after a long gap on 7.09.202] and registered notices 
were issued to both the parties but neither the workman nor management appeared before this Tribunal. Though on 
27.06.2025 Sri Md. Faishal Asstt. Manager appeared on behalf of the management but the workman/union did not 
appear before this Tribunal since the year 202l which shows that workman/union has lost his interest in this case and 
therefore, this Tribunal is of the opinion that the case deserves to be dismissed due to non prosecution. 


4. Hence, 


5960 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 4592.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-। के पंचाट (संदर्भ Pe 239/200l) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-20042/373/2004-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


9.0. 592.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 239/200l) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/373/200l— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 239/200 


Employer in relation to the management of Western Jharia Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-2002/373/200l-IR(C-D) dated 07/l/200l has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Western Jharia Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Sri B. Mohanti, Area 
Secretary, Bihar Colliery Kamgar Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether denial of subsistence allowance for the period of 4 months during suspension and then 
demoting Sri Bideshi Bauri from conveyer Khalasi Cat-V to General Mazdoor Cat-I, is jusfied and 
proportionate to the offence committed? If not, to what relief is the workman entitled?” 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 596l 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/373/200l-IR(C-I) dated 27/I/200l Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 239 of 200l was registered on 02.0I.2004 and 
thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with 
relevant documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities, W/S and subsequently 
rejoinder. It further appears that after 2006 this case was put up after a long gap on !5.0.202] and registered notices 
were issued to both the parties but workman/union did not appear before this Tribunal. However Sri D.K. Verma, 
Ld. Advocate on behalf of the management appeared. Thereafter again regd. notice was sent to workman/union on 


30.05.2025 and the same was returned with endorsement “प्राप्तकर्ता मर गया है इसलिए वापस” and workman/union did 


not appear since the year 202! which shows that workman/union has lost his interest in this case and therefore, this 
Tribunal is of the opinion that the case deserves to be dismissed due to non prosecution. 


4. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 4593.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 8$4/2002) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-20042/424/2002-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 593.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 84/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/2/2002— IR (CM-D] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 84/2002 
Employer in relation to the management of Sijua Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 


Their workman. 
Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 
Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate. 


For the workman. :- None. 


5962 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/2/2002-IR(C-IT) dated 25/07/2002 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Sijua Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Secretary, Bihar Janta Khan 
Mazdoor, Sijua, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the management of M/s. BCCL, Sijua Area in not regularising Shri Jamal 
Khan as Loading Supervisor is fair & Justified? If not, to what relief is the concerned workman 
entitled and from what date?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/I2/2002-IR(C-I) dated 25/07/2002 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 84 of 2002 was registered on 02.08.2002 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities, W/S and subsequently 
rejoinder. It further appears that after 2006 this case was put up after a long gap on 29.07.202 and registered notices 
were issued to both the parties but workman/union failed to appear before this Tribunal. However Sri D.K. Verma, 
Ld. Advocate on behalf of the management appeared. Thereafter again regd. notice was issued to workman/union but 
workman/union did not appear since the year 202] which shows that workman/union has lost his interest in this case 
and therefore, this Tribunal is of the opinion that the case deserves to be dismissed due to non prosecution. 


4. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 4594.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ Wea 96/200]) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-20042/496/2000-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 594.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 96/200) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/496/2000— IR (CM-D)] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.I,DHANBAD 


In the matter of reference U/S [0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5963 


Reference Case No. 96/200 
Employer in relation to the management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri N.Nath O.S. Legal, H.Q. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 28/07/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/496/2000-(C-D dated 29/03/200l has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer 
i.e. management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Area Secretary, Bihar Colliery Kamgar 
Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“क्या भा.को.को.ल्रिमि., ई.जे. क्षेत्र के प्रबंधतंत्र द्वारा श्री सुदर्शन ओझा, जनरल मजदूर को दि. 5.0.98 से बर्खास्त 
किया जाना विधिवत, न्यायोचित एवं सही है ? यदि नहीं तो कर्मकार किस राहत के पात्र हैं?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/496/2000-(C-D) dated 29/03/200l Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New 
Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 96 of 200 was registered on 24.04.200I and thereafter the 
notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After issuance of regd. notice, none appeared on behalf of the workman. It further transpires from the case 
record that when the case record was put up after a long gap, registered notices were sent on 26.05.2020 for 
appearance of the parties but thereafter no step was taken from either side. Whereas Sri Naresh prasad, Ld. Advocate 
appeared from the side of the management on 7.03.202] and filed his letter of authority and subsequently from 
22..202] to 2.03.2022 he appeared before this Tribunal and thereafter failed to appear but the workman never 
appeared before the Tribunal since 200l, though on 20.06.2025, Sri N. Nath 0.5 Legal, H.Q appeared for the 
management. 


4. On perusal of the entire case record it is transpires that the workman never appeared before this Tribunal for a 
period of 24 years which shows that the workman has lost his interest in this case and therefore, for the ends of 
justice, this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 


5. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. (595.—aiteifre 9 विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 4/20]) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49/08/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. Tet-2002/67/2040-3rg. 38. (सी.एम-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


5964 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 595.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 4/20) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/67/200— IR (CM-D] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S [0 Cl) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. /20I 
Employer in relation to the management of Sijua Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 


Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri N. Nath O.S, H.Q (Legal) 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/67/20i0 (IR(CM-I)) dated 6/03/20l has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Sijua Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Organising Secretary, Rashtriya 
Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 

“Whether the action of the management of Tetulmari Colliery of M/s BCCL in not regularizing 

Sri Kanhaiya Lal as Attendance Clerk is fair and justified? To what relief the concerned workman is 

entitled to?” 

2. On receiving order no. L-2002/67/20l0 (R(CM-ID) dated 6/03/20!l Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. |! of 20] was registered on 08.04.20 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 
3. Even after issuance of regd. notice, none appeared from either side though on 30.05.2025, Sri Mukesh Kumar, 
Legal Inspector of management appeared. Again regd. notice was sent to the workman on 30.05.2025 that was 
delivered to him on 06.06.2025 and even after that he did not turn up. 
4. Today Sri N. Nath O.S, H.Q (Legal) of management appeared. 
5. The case record shows that after issuance of two regd. notices, the workman never appeared before the Tribunal 
since the year 20l] which makes it clear that the workman has no interest in this case and therefore, this Tribunal is 
of the opinion that this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 
6. Hence, 
ORDERED 

that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 4596.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4 के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 293/2000) 


[भाग I— aves 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5965 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49,/08,/ 2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 

[सं. एल-20042/432/2002-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 

सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 596.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 293/2000) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/32/2002— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL २०0.।,०प ७४३७ ५७ 


In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 293/2000 


Employer in relation to the management of Kusunda Area of M/s. BCCL. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri S.N. Ghosh, Advocate 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 28/07/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-2002/32/2000-IR(C-D dated 27.09.2000 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Kusunda Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Vice President, Rashtriya 
Colliery Mazdoor Sangh, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the management of Industry Colliery of M/s BCCL in not providing 
employment to Sri Ashok Kumar Mahato, S/o Late Bhupali Mahato is justified? If not, to what relief 
is the concerned workman entitled?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-200I2/I32/2000-IR(C-I) dated 27/09/2000 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 293 of 2000 was registered on 04.!0.2000 and 
thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with 
relevant documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities,W/S and rejoinder. It transpires 
from the case record that after 2006 this case was put up after a long gap on 2.06.20I7 and registered notices were 
issued to both the parties and both parties appeared but again after 7.0.208 this case was put up after a long gap on 
3.7.209 and again regd. notices were issued to both the parties and workman/union appeared on 27.09.209 and 
26.2.20i9 and thereafter failed to appear before this Tribunal. Though on 26.06.2025 Sri S.N. Ghosh, Advocate 
appeared on behalf of the management but the workman/union did not appear before this Tribunal since 26.2.209 
which shows that workman/union has lost his interest in this case and therefore, this Tribunal is of the opinion that the 
case deserves to be dismissed due to non prosecution. 


4. Hence, 


5966 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 20 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. 4597.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
wor बीसीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-। के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 40/200l) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 49,//08,// 2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल- 20072/40/200I-arg.sik. (Al. TH-])] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 20th August, 2025 


S.O. 597.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 40/200l) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 9/08/2025. 


[No. L-2002/0/200I— IR (CM-D] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 Cl) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 40/200I 
Employer in relation to the management of Bhowra Colliery under E.J. Area of M/s.BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 


Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri N.Nath O.S. Legal, H.Q 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 28/07/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/0/200-C-I dated 8/24.05.200! has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer 
i.e. management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Secretary, B.C.K.U, Hirapur, Dhanbad for 
adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“कर्मकार श्री बी.एन.डे. की सेवानिवृत्ति, उनकी बीमारी (कैंसर), एवं उससे पूर्व Ses शारीरिक रूप से सेवा के लिए घोषित 
न किए जा सकने की परिस्थितियों पर दृष्टि रखते हुए क्या बिहार को. कामगार यूनियन को भा.को.को.ल्ि., ई.जे क्षेत्र, 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5967 


के प्रबंधतंत्र से, कर्मकार के आश्रित पुत्र को अनुकम्पा आधार पर नियुक्ति दिए जाने की मांग उचित एवं न्‍्यायसंगत है? 
यदि हाँ तो Far निर्देश आवश्यक हैं?” 


2. On receiving order no. 7.-2002/0/200]-(0- dated 8/24.05.200! Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New 
Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 40 of 200! was registered on 20.06.200I and thereafter the 
notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities and W/S. It further appears that 
workman/union also filed some documents and led evidence from his side. It transpires from the case record that after 
2007 this case was put up after a long gap on 30.09.2020 and registered notices were issued to both the parties but 
neither the workman nor management appeared before this Tribunal. Thereafter on 7.03.202 Sri Naresh Prasad, Ld. 
Advocate for management appeared and filed his letter of authority after that he appeared on different dates till 
2.03.2022 and subsequently failed to appear before this Tribunal. Though on 20.06.2025 Sri N. Nath, O.S. Legal, 
H.Q appeared on behalf of the management but the workman/union did not appear before this Tribunal since the year 
2020 which shows that workman/union has lost his interest in this case and therefore, this Tribunal is of the opinion 
that the case deserves to be dismissed due to non prosecution. 


4. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the above reference case. 
Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India, New 
Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. (598.—aiteifre विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ब्रॉडकास्टिंग इंजीनियरिंग कंसल्टेंट इंडिया लिमिटेड.के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय नं. II, 


नई दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (आई डी नम्बर 06/20I9) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 25/08/2025 
को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल-20043/04/2025-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 25th August, 2025 


S.O. 598.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (ID No. 06/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court NO.II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BroadCasting Engineering Consultant India Ltd. and their workmen, received by the Central Government 
on 25/08/2025. 


[No. L-2003/0/2025— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDSUTRIAL TRIBUNAL - CUM — LABOUR COURT-II, 
NEW DELHI 


LD. NO. 06/209 

Sh. Pawan Das, S/o Sh. Hari Das, 
R/o- B-!248, Gautampuri Phase-II, 
Badarpur, New Delhi-0020. 


5968 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


VERSUS 
l. The Director, 
All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), 
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi-0029. 
2. M/s Broadcasting Engineering Consultant India Ltd., 
Besil Bhawan, C-53, A/l7, Sector-62, 
Noida-20307. 
AWARD 
l, This is an application U/s 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after is referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant. 
2. Claimant in his claim statement has stated that he was working as Data Entry with the management-| 


through contractor i.e. Bedi & Bedi Associate Company, since 8.02.202 and his last drawn salary was Rs. 6,468/-. 
He did his work well and has not given any chance of making any complaint to the management nor was he charged 
while he was in service. Thereafter, his contract period had expired on 30.09.206 and a new contract was taken over 
by M-2 i.e. BECIL on 0.0.206, but none of the old employees including workman by Bedi & Bedi Associate 
Company were removed. Apart from the above data entry, he was also made to do dealing head (online tender, 
uploading, price BOQ, tender process, tender comparative/tender price comparative, tender corrigendum, making 
tender rate contract, reply of RTI/company letters, reply of internal audit AIIMS, EMD refund and hospital transport 
work, officer dealing/company representative dealing etc.). He complaint about the above workload and mental stress 
to the hospital store officer and company manager but the company manager and store officer did not pay any heed to 
his complaint. Thereafter, on |7.04.208 he was terminated without issuing any notice, without any rhyme or reason. 
He informed the company management on 03.05.20l8about his illegal termination and also gave him a written 
complaint, but no hearing was held and he was not taken back on job. He has gone to the conciliation officer, but it 
was resulted into failure. Hence, he filed the present claim with the prayer that he be reinstated with full back wages. 
3: Management no. | has already been proceeded ex-parte vide order dated 02.08.209. 

4. Management no. 2 has filed its written statement stating that claim of the claimant is not maintainable 
because the employment of the complaint with the M-2 was for a fixed period purely on contractual basis and the 
same had expired by efflux of time. He also submitted that claimant has raised the present false and frivolous claim 
against the management, the same is not maintainable and liable to be dismissed. . 


ay After completion of the pleadings, following issues have been framed on 8.2.209 i.e.- 

(i) Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 

(ii) Whether there exist any employer or employee relationship between the workman and he management no. 2. 
(iii) Whether the service of the workman was illegally terminated by the management. 

(iv) Whether the workman is entitled to the benefit of reinstatement and other consequential benefits. 

6. Thereafter, AR of the workman has filed an application for amendment in claim. Now, the matter is listed for 


filing of reply against the said application. However, neither the workman nor his AR has been appearing since long 
to substantiate his claim. 


ds In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in perusing his case, this tribunal has no option 
but to dismiss his claim. Hence, his claim stands dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent 
to appropriate government for notification under section 7 of the I.D. Act. File is consigned to record room. 


ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 
Date: 29.05.2025 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. 599.—sileitie विवाद अधिनियम, i947 (i947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार जेट एयरवेज इंडिया लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में exter सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय नं. IL नई दिल्ली के पंचाट 


(आई डी नम्बर (0/203) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 25/08/2025 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था। 


[सं. एल- 20043/04/2025-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5969 


New Delhi, the 25th August, 2025 


S.O. 599.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (ID No. 0/203) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court NO.II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of Jet 
Airways India Ltd. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 25/08/2025. 


[No. L-2003/0/2025— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
EFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM —- LABOUR COURT NO. II, NEW DELHI 
LD. No. 04/203 
Sh. Sube Singh vs. Jet Airways India Ltd. 
Sh. Sube Singh, C/o Sh. Master Hukum Chand, 
A-64, 3 Floor, Road No.-4, Street No.-l], 
Mahipalpur, New Delhi-!0037. 
...Applicant/Claimant 
Versus 
Jet Airways India Ltd., 
Terminal-3, IGI Airport, 
New Delhi-0037. 


Management/respondent 
Counsels: 
For Applicant/ Claimant: 
Sh. Akhilesh Singh and Ms. Radhika Goyal, Ld. ARs. 
For Management/ Respondent: 
None for the management. 
Award 
30.06.2025 


The present application has been filed under Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’). The claimant claims to have been employed with the management as a Senior 
Ground Technician w.e.f. 08.02.2007, and his last drawn salary was Rs. 9,375/-. On 8.07.20l, when the claimant 
requested the management to grant him leave for one day, i.e., 2.07.20I, for the operation of his mother, Col. 
Kulwant Singh, GSD, Manager of the management, refused to grant leave, forcibly detained him in the office, 
confined him for 2—3 hours, and thereafter coerced him into giving his resignation letter. He tried to approach the 
senior officials, but they did not allow him to rejoin duties at the instance of Manager GSD, Col. Kulwant Singh. It 
was submitted that the said act of the management is unlawful and arbitrary. Therefore, he has filed the present claim 
with the prayer that he be reinstated with full back wages, continuity of service, and other consequential benefits. 


In response, the management appeared and filed a written statement denying the claimant’s averments. As a 
preliminary objection, it was submitted that the present claim is not maintainable before the Tribunal as the claimant 
was employed as a Senior Ground Support Technician and was performing functions of supervisory and 
administrative nature, and therefore, did not fall within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Act. It 
was further submitted that the claimant had submitted a resignation letter dated 8.07.20] citing personal reasons, 
which was accepted by the management upon his request. The claimant was accordingly relieved from his services 
with immediate effect. 


On merits, the management denied each and every allegation made by the claimant in his claim statement. It 
was specifically denied that the claimant had sought leave, or was forcefully detained and coerced into writing the 
resignation letter. Lastly, the management prayed that the claim be dismissed in view of the above submissions. 


5970 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 
A Rejoinder had been filed by the claimant where he denied the averments made by the management in its 
written statement and reaffirmed the averments of his claim statement. 
After completion of pleadings, following issues were framed: 
l. Whether the claimant is a workman within the meaning of section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947? 
2. Whether services of the claimant were dispensed with by the management illegally on 8.07.20I? 
3. Whether the claimant is entitled to relief of reinstatement in service? 


In order to prove his claim, the claimant examined himself as WW. He reiterated the contents of his claim 
statement and relied upon the following documents: 


e Acopy of the salary slip (Ex. ४७४७॥/।). 

e Acopy of confirmation letter issued by the management (Ex. ४४/७॥/2). 
e Acopy of leave application (Ex. ४४७॥/३). 

e Acopy of medical case sheet of the claimant’s mother (Ex. ७४७॥/4). 

e Termination letter issued by the management (Ex. ४४/७४॥/5). 

e Legal notice sent by the claimant (Ex. ४४/७४॥/6). 

e Speed post receipt (Ex. ४४/७४७।/)). 


e Order of Ld. P.O.L.C., Karkardooma Court, Delhi whereby the claimant was granted liberty to file the claim 
before the Conciliation Officer (Ex. ७४४५७४॥/७). 


e Failure certificate issued by the conciliation officer (Ex. ४४७॥/५) 

The claimant was cross-examined at length by AR for the management, during which he admitted that : 

e The resignation letter was signed by him but it was taken under compulsion. 

e No police complaint was made by him in respect of the forced resignation. 

e He denied that the leave application was forged and fabricated and was never submitted to the management. 
e He admitted that up to 20I], he used to take leaves as usual like other employees. 


e He admitted that the employees who were working as assistants were getting instructions and guidance in respect 
of work from assistant technicians and assistants technicians were working under senior technicians. 


The entire case of the claimant rests on the premise that he was a workman and was coerced into writing his 
resignation letter when he sought leave, thereby being wrongfully terminated on 8.07.20l. On the other hand, the 
management’s case is that the claimant is not a ‘workman’ as defined under Section 2(s) of the Act. In this regard, 
Section 2(s) of the Act is required to be reproduced herein: 


2 [(s) “workman” means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any manual, 
unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms 
of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an 
industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection 
with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that 
dispute, but does not include any such person— 


(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 7950 (45 ०7950), or the Army Act, 7950 (46 of 7950), or the Navy 
Act, 7957 (62 of 79527); or 


(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prison; or 


(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or (iv) who, being employed in a 
supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 3[ten thousand rupees] per mensem or exercises, either by the 
nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested in him, functions mainly of a 
managerial nature.] 


On a fair reading of the provisions in section 2(s) of the Act, it is clear that ‘workman’ means any person 
employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for 
hire or reward including any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched. 


The latter part of the section excluded four classes of employed mainly in a managerial or administrative 
capacity, or a person employed in a supervisory capacity drawing wages exceeding Rs. 600/- per month or exercises 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 597] 


functions mainly of a managerial nature. It has to be taken as an accepted principle that in order to come within the 
meaning of the expression ‘workman’ under section 2(s), the person has to be discharging any one of the types of the 
works enumerated in the first portion of the section. If the person does not come within the first portion of the section 
then it is not necessary to consider the further question whether he comes within any of the classes of workmen 
excluded under the latter part of the section. The question whether the person concerned comes within the first part of 
the section depends upon the nature of duties assigned to him and/or discharged by him. 


Now coming to the evidence led by the claimant: admittedly, he was working as a ‘Senior Technician’ and 
was drawing a salary above Rs. 0,000/- per month. In his cross-examination, the claimant himself admitted that 
assistant technicians and assistants were working under senior technicians and received instructions from them. 


The claimant also relied upon a judgment of Hon’ble Supreme court of India in Sharad Kumar vs. 
Government of NCT of Delhi & Ors., Appeal (civil) 2622 of 2002, passed on .04.2002, where the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court had directed GNCTD to refer the dispute raised by the appellant to the labour court including the 
question whether the appellant is a ‘workman’ under the Act. However, in the present case, evidence has already been 
led, and the claimant himself admitted that he worked in a supervisory capacity as a Senior Technician, with 
subordinates reporting to him, and earned a salary of Rs. 9,375/-, which exceeds the statutory ceiling. 


Considering the evidence discussed, the claimant cannot be said to be a ‘workman’ under section 2(s) of the 
Act. Accordingly, issue no.| is decided in favor of the management, and against the claimant. 


In view of the findings on issue no. |, there is no need to decide issue no. 2 & 3. The claim of the claimant 
stands dismissed. Award is accordingly passed. A copy of this award be sent to the appropriate government for 
notification under section 7 of the Act. The file is consigned to record room. 


ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 
Dated 30.06.2025 


नई दिल्‍ली, 28 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. 4600.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम t947 (4947 का 44.) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
केंद्रिय लोक निर्माण विभाग सेवा केंद्र के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण श्रम न्यायालय नं feet के tare (02/2024) प्रकाशित 
करती है। 


[सं, एल-42025/04/2025-आई.आर. (बी-)-408] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 28th August, 2025 


S.O. 600.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.02/2024) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
No. .Delhi_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of PWD Service 
Center_and their workmen. 


[No. L-2025/0/2025— IR(B-) -08] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - I, 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No.02/2024 


Smt. Anita & 43 ors, Through Indian National Migrant Workers’ Union, 770/8, 3 7 Floor, Govind Puri Extn., Main 
Road Kalkaji, new Delhi. 


...Claimant 
Versus 
CPWD Service Centre, Hudco Place, Andrews Ganj Exttn., Andrews Ganj, New Delhi-0049. 
2. M/s MIA Construction Pvt. Ltd., A-3l, Plot No.l, Gaurav Apptts, Patparganj, Delhi-0092. 
3. M/s Rajesh Kumar Jain & Sons, GG-62/2A, Vikas Puri, New Delhi-!008. 


... Management 


5972 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


l. In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-ND-25/II- 
08/2023-IR dated 26.2.2023 under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Act, for 
adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


“Whether the demands (details mentioned in Annexures-A) of Smt. Anita & 43 others (Details mentioned 
in Annexure-B) through Indian National Migrant Workers Union against the management of M/s Rajesh 
Kumar Jain & Sons contractor of CPWWD Service Centre, Hudco Place, New Delhi, are legal and/or 
justified? And if so, then what relief are the workmen entitled to what directions are necessary in this 
regard?” 


2. In the reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the dispute to file 
statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within 5 days 
of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite parties involved in 
the dispute. Despite directions so given, Claimant union opted not to file the claim statement with the Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the managements. Neither the 
postal article sent to the claimant, referred above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal 
services remained unserved in the period, referred above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favor of the fact that 
the above notice was served upon the claimant. Despite service of the notice, claimant opted to abstain away from the 
proceedings. No claim statement was filed on his behalf. Thus, it is clear that the workman is not interested in 
adjudication of the reference on merits. 


4. Since the workman has neither put in his appearance nor he led any evidence so as to prove his cause against 
the management, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let this award be 
sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947, for publication. 


ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 
Date: 23.07.2025 


नई दिल्‍ली, 28 अगस्त, 2025 


का.आ. 4604.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
केंद्रिय लोक निर्माण विभाग सेवा केंद्र के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण »श्रम न्यायालय aI दिल्ली के tae (03/2024) प्रकाशित 
करती है। 


[सं, एल-42025/04/2025-आई.आर. (AT-I)-09] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 28th August, 2025 


S.O. 60l.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 03/2024) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
No. \_Delhi_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of CPWD_ Service 
Central_and their workmen. 


[No. L-2025/0/2025— IR(B-) -09] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - I, 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No.03/2024 


Shri Sikander Kumar Parihar & 52 ors, Through Indian National Migrant Workers’ Union, 770/8, 37 Floor, Govind 
Puri Extn., Main Road Kalkaji, new Delhi. 


...Claimant 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5973 


Versus 
l. CPWD Service Centre, Hudco Place, Andrews Ganj Exttn., Andrews Ganj, New Delhi-!0049. 
2. M/s MIA Construction Pvt. Ltd., A-3l, Plot No.l, Gaurav Apptts, Patparganj, Delhi-!0092. 
3. M/s Rajesh Kumar Jain & Sons, GG-62/2A, Vikas Puri, New Delhi-!008. 
... Management 
AWARD 


l. In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-ND-25/II- 
07/2023-IR dated 26.!2.2023 under clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Act, for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


The Schedule 


‘Whether the demands (details mentioned in Annexures-A) of Shri Sikender Kumar Parihar & 52 others 
(Details mentioned in Annexure-B) through Indian National Migrant Workers Union against the 
management of M/s Rajesh Kumar Jain & Sons contractor of CPWWD Service Centre, Hudco Place, 
New Delhi, are legal and/or justified? And if so, then what relief are the workmen entitled to what 
directions are necessary in this regard?’ 


2, In the reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the dispute to file 
statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within |5 days 
of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite parties involved in 
the dispute. Despite directions so given, Claimant union opted not to file the claim statement with the Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the managements. Neither the 
postal article sent to the claimant, referred above, was received back nor was it observed by the Tribunal that postal 
services remained unserved in the period, referred above. Therefore, every presumption lies in favor of the fact that 
the above notice was served upon the claimant. Despite service of the notice, claimant opted to abstain away from the 
proceedings. No claim statement was filed on his behalf. Thus, it is clear that the workman is not interested in 
adjudication of the reference on merits. 


4. Since the workman has neither put in his appearance nor he led any evidence so as to prove his cause against 
the management, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let this award be 
sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, for publication. 


Date: 23.07.2025 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 28 अगस्त, 2025 
का.आ. 4602.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, i947 (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
इंडसइंड बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय AI दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (66/20I7) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. Wet-2042/7/207-3ig 3m. (बी-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 28th August, 2025 


S.O. 602.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.66/207) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
No. \Delhi_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Indusind Bank 
and their workmen. 


[No. L-202/I/207— IR (B-I)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


5974 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - I, 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No. 66/207 
Sh. Sunil Kumar Dwivedi, (F.C. No. 395), H. No. F-47, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi-!0059. 
...Claimant 
Versus 


l. Indusind Bank, Zonal Office, Human Resource Department Unit NOIS TF-2 to TF-8, 3% Floor, Vasant Kunj 
Square Mall, New Delhi. 


2. Indusind Bank Ltd., Through its General Manager, Pitampura Branch, New Delhi. 
... Management 
AWARD 

l. In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-L- 
202//20l7(IR(B-I)) dated 09.06.207 under clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section (2A) of Section 40 of 
the Act, for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 

“4, Whether Shri Sunil Kumar Dwivedi is a workman within the provisions of I.D. Act. 

2. Whether penalty of dismissal from service w.e.f. 08.06.20I5 imposed on Shri Sunil Kumar Dwivedi, 

Associate Manager Indusind Bank after enquiring is just and fair. If not, what relief he is entitled to?” 
2. In the reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the dispute to file 
statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within |5 days 


of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite parties involved in 
the dispute. Despite directions so given, Claimant union opted not to file the claim statement with the Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the management. But then, the 
claimant opted not to file statement of claim statement. Hence, the matter was resulted in no dispute. No dispute 
Award dated 08.0.208 was passed accordingly. 


4. Thereafter, on 0.05.209, an application for setting aside/recall the No Dispute Award was moved by the 
claimant and the matter was fixed for reply and consideration of that application. Then, on 22.0.2025, the said 
application was decided and stood allowed. The case came to its original status and the claimant was directed to file 
statement of claim. But again, despite several opportunities, neither the claimant appeared nor filed any statement of 
claim. 


5. In these circumstances, when the claimant is not pursuing his case, this Tribunal is left with no choice, 
except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let this award be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under 
Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947, for publication. 


Date: 2.08.2025 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 28 जुलाई, 2025 


का.आ. 4603.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार वेस्टर्न कोलफील्ड्स लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, नागपुर के पंचाट 


(सीजीआईटी/एनजीपी/02/2043-44)को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 27/07/2025 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था। 


[सं. Wet-2202/265/204 2-378. 38. (सी. एम- ID] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 28th July, 2025 


S.O. 603.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (CGIT/NGP/02/203-4)of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court,Nagpur as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of Western Coalfields Ltd. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 28/07/2025. 


[No. L-2202/265/202— IR (CM- ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5975 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE SHRI SHIV SHANKER PRASAD PRESIDING OFFICER. 
CGIT-CUM-LABOUR COURT, NAGPUR 


Case No.CGIT/NGP/02/203-4 Date: 20.05.2025. 
Party No.I: The Sub Area Manager, 


Kumbharkhani U/G Mines of Rajur Sub 
Area of Wani North Area of WCL, 
Post Rajur, Tah. Wani, Distt. Yavatmal, 
Yavatmal (M.S.) 

Vis. 

Party No.2: The General Secretary, 
Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Congress, 
Dr. Ambedkar Ward, Ballarpur, 
Post Ballarpur, Distt. Chandrapur 
Chandrapur (M.S.) 
AWARD 
(Dated: 20" May, 2025) 


In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section 2(A) of section 0 of 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947) (“the Act” in short), the Central Government has referred the industrial 
dispute between the employers, in relation to the management of Kumbharkhani U/G Mines of Rajur Sub, and their 
workman Shri. Narendra, dependent son of Shri Konkat Narsayya, for adjudication, as per letter No. L- 
2202/265/202 (IR(CM-ID)) dated 05.03.203, with the following schedule:- 


“Whether the action of the Management of Kumbharkhani U/G Mines of Rajur Sub Area of Wani 
North Area of Western Coalfields Limited, in denying employment to Shri Narendra the dependent son of Shri 
Konkat Narsayya who has already put in more than 37 years’ service, which is contrary to the provision of 
Para 9.4.4 of NCWA is legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2, Case is called out. Both parties are absent. Both parties are not responding and attending the Court since 
2.2.20i6. Although statement of claim and written statement have been filed by the parties respectively. Petitioner 
has not filed any other evidence to prove his case. Petitioner is not coming to the Court since 2.2.206. It appears 
that petitioner is not interested to contest the case further more. Claim of the petitioner is not proved. So, it is closed. 


Hence, it is ordered. 
ORDER 


The action of the Management of Kumbharkhani U/G Mines of Rajur Sub Area of Wani North Area 
of Western Coalfields Limited, in denying employment to Shri Narendra the dependent son of Shri Konkat 
Narsayya who has already put in more than 37 years’ service, which is contrary to the provision of Para 9.4.4 
of NCWA is legal and justified. The workman is not entitled to any relief. 


Justice (Retd.) SHIV SHANKER PRASAD, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, सितम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4604.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पारादीप पोर्ट ट्रस्ट के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय भुवनेशवर के पंचाट (88/207) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल-38042/03/2047-आई.आर. (बी- ID] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


5976 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the Ist September, 2025 


S.O. 604.—In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (44 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 88/207) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Bhubaneswar_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Paradip Port 
Trust and their workmen. 


[No. L-3802/03/207- IR(B-II)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 
Present: 
Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 
Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 
Bhubaneswar. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 88/207 
Date of Passing Order — 23" April, 2025 
Between :- 
l. The Chairman, Paradip Port Trust, 
Paradip, Dist. Jagatsinghpur, Odisha. 
2. The Executive Engineer (EE), PHD, 
Paradip Port Trust, Paradipt, Jagatsinghpur. 
[| Party-Managements. 
(And) 
Shri Bhagaban Das, 
Infront of Ambika High School Gate, 
Gopinath Colony, P.O. Atharbanki, Paradip 
276 Party-Workman. 
Appearances: 
Sri Binayak Pradhan, be For the [* Party- 
Executive Engineer, PPT Managements. 
Shri Bhagaban Das. a For the 2" party- 
Workmen. 
AWARD 


In the present case, a reference was received from the Section Officer to the Government of India, Ministry 
of Labour & Employment, New Delhi vide order No. L-3802/03/207 — IR(B-ID), dated I.2.207 under clause (d) 
of sub-section () and sub-section (2A) of Section !0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 for adjudication of a 
dispute, under the following schedule:- 


“Whether the alleged termination of the workman Shri Bhagaban Das, Ex-Pump Operator by the 
Executive Engineer, PHD of M/s. Paradip Port Trust, Paradip allegedly working from 3.07.987 to 
..2005 is legal and/or justified? If not so, what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2; The case of the 277 party-workman Sri Bhagaban Das as per his statement of claim is as follows:- 


He was an employee under the [* Party-Management of Paradip Port Trust which is an autonomous body 
and as an “Industry” under the Industrial Disputes Act (in short Act). He was appointed on 0.!.99 and was posted 
at Brundaban Colony Water Supply Pump House as an Operator where he was operating the water supply valve, 
electric motor pumps as well as diesel motor pump and he was paid Rs. 700/- as fixed wages. Subsequently he was 
transferred to Balighara Water Treatment Plant on 05.06.!996 by the I“ Party-Management No. 2 (Executive 
Engineer/Asst. Engineer) and he continued to discharge his work on fixed monthly wages of Rs. 900/- per month. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5977 


He was paid wages of Rs. [482/- per month from 0.05.997 to 3.04.200l. Rs. [248/- per month from [.5.200[ to 
3.07.2003 and thereafter Rs. 650/- per month by the I“ party-Management No. 2. He was discharging his duties 
smoothly, but on 27.07.2004 he and seventeen others were not allowed to continue their duties by Sri S.K. Das 
Executive Engineer, PHD (M). Thereafter from 27.07.2004 till 3.03.2005 the *' Party-Management No. 2 resumed 
the operation of water supply by deploying some regular and casual workers of other departments of the Paradip Port 
Trust and from 0.04.2005 the |7 Party-Management had engaged eight other persons without any intimation. In the 
meantime, after three years the |7 Party-Management No. 2 again engaged [2 workmen out of 8 workmen who 
were terminated on 27.07.2004 without any knowledge to rest of six workers. The |7 Party-Management had 
discriminated between the workers by appointing 2 other workmen. After that, the 27 party-workman along with 
two others raised a complaint before the [7 Party-management No. | which had directed the Chief Engineer to make 
arrangement for reinstatement of all the three persons, but out of three workers, Sri D. Maharana was re-employed 
without the knowledge of other two persons. The 2™ party-workman was continuously visiting the office of the Chief 
Engineer (PHD) (M) on frequent intervals and had submitted a representation to the Management No. 2 for re- 
employment as an Operator as there were vacancies at Balijhara Pump. Thereafter the 27 party-workman had raised a 
dispute before the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) and after failure of conciliation the matter was 
referred to Ministry of Labour for adjudication. The termination by the 7 Party-Managements without any reason or 
show cause and without following due procedure of law stipulated under section 25-F, 25-G & 25-H of the LD. Act, 
is an abuse of power and principles of natural justice. 


A prayer has been made to hold the date of termination of the workman from his employment on 
27.07.2004 is void, ab-nitio, illegal and reinstatement with all back wages and all consequential benefits along with 
interest. 


3. The case of the [7 Party-Management No. | and 2 are as follows:- 


That the 2" party-workman was neither an employee of the I“ party-management nor the I“ party- 
Management was an employer of him. As the 27 party-workman along with other 7 others had raised the dispute 
before the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central) mentioning that they were working under contractor, so the 
employer must have been made party in this case. The management of Paradip Port Trust is a statutory body under 
the Ministry of Shipping and the recruitment/selection/termination etc. are governed under the Paradip Port Trust 
Employees (Recruitment, Seniority & promotion) Regulation 967. The 20 party-workman had not been appointed 
by the Paradip Port Trust and he had not submitted any appointment order in support of his employment so as to 
enable him to raise the industrial dispute against the Paradip Port Trust. Further the 27 party-workman has not been 
appointed by the Paradip Port Trust so there is no question of his termination by the |7 Party-Management. The | 
party-Management had not appointed any Pump Operator in the name of Bhagaban Dash (workman) and the 
Executive Engineer, P.H. Division is not competent to appoint/terminate an employee of Paradip Port Trust, so the 
statement of the 2™ party-workman is false. The 2"! party-workman has raised a dispute after the gap of fourteen 
years, 50 it is a stale dispute. The workman has not submitted any appointment order issued in support of his claim 
that he had been appointed as Operator in Paradip Port Trust. The statement of the 2" party-workman was 
contradictory as at one hand he had stated that he was an employee of a contractor and the other hand he was saying 
that he was appointed by the Paradip Port Trust. There is no master and servant relationship and employer and 
employee relationship between the * party-management and the 27 party-workman. 


A prayer has been made to pass an award that the reference is not maintainable as there is no merit in the 
demand of the 277 party-workman. 


4. The 274 party-workman has submitted rejoinder to the written statement of the [7 Party-management in 
which he had denied all the averments made in the written statement filed by the ।7 Party- Managements. 


5. On the basis of the pleadings of both the parties following issues are framed:- 
ISSUES 
i) Whether the reference is maintainable? 


ii) Whether any employer and employee relationship was existing between the workman and the Management 
No. | & the Management No. 2? 


iii) Whether the termination of the services of the workman w.e.f. 27.07.2004 by the Management No. 2 is 
illegal and unjustified due to non-compliance of Section 25-F of the I.D. Act, 947? 


iv) What relief the workmen are entitled to? 


6. In course of the proceedings, the 2™ party-workman has examined two witnesses namely W.W.-l Bhagaban 
Das, the workman himself and W.W.-2 Sri Niranjan Das. 


7. The 2™ party-workman proved and exhibited the following documents which are marked as exhibits:- 


Ext.-| is the photocopy of experience certificate issued by Sri N. Das, Asst. Engineer. 


5978 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ext.-2 is the photocopy of I. Card. 


Ext.-3 is the photocopy of subscription to the Union. 


8. The |7 Party-Managements has examined only one witness. He is Binayak Pradhan. The 7 Party- 
Managements has not proved and exhibited any documents. 

FINDINGS 
9. For the sake of convenience, the Tribunal thinks it proper to discuss first of all the Issue No. I & IL. 


ISSUE NO. I & I 


0. The Tribunal first of all with regard to this issue thinks it proper to discuss the oral and documentary 
evidence of both the parties. 


The most competent witness on this point is ४.७४.-] Shri Bhagaban Das who is the concerned workman. He 
has deposed before the Tribunal that on |..99! he was engaged as Pump Operator at Brundaban Colony Water 
Supply Pump house to operate water supply valve, heavy electrical mother pump as well as diesel motor pump and 
his training on operation of different pumps was given by the office of the Chief Engineer, Paradip Port Trust. He 
has also deposed that he was later engaged at new Balighara Water Treatment Plant on 05.06.!996 and at that time 
he was being paid his monthly wages as Rs. 900/-. He has also deposed that since .5.997 to 3.4.200I his 
monthly wages was Rs. [482/-, and during the period from .5.200l to 3!.07.2003 his salary was reduced to Rs. 
248/- per month, but it was again revised as Rs. 650/- per month. He has also deposed that on 27.07.2004 the 
Executive Engineer, PHD(M) did not allow him and other |7 workmen to continue their duty at Balijhara Water 
Treatment Plant so he was illegally terminated without any notice, without any valid reason and without following the 
provisions of Section 25-F, 25-G and 25-H of the Act. 


He has proved the Xerox copy of experience certificate issued by Shri N. Das Asst. Engineer Xerox copy of 
I-Card as, the Xerox copy of subscription to the Union which are marked as Ext.-l, Ext.-2 and Ext.-3 respectively. 


In the cross examination he has deposed that he had not filed any appointment letter to show that he was 
engaged/employed by the Managements, but he has deposed hat he was orally asked to work under the Managements. 
He has also deposed that he has not filed any documents to show that he was an employee of Paradip Port Trust and 
he was receiving any wages from the said authority. He has denied the suggestion that there was no “employer and 
employee” relationship between the Management and him. He has also denied the suggestion that he was an 
employee of a contractor and he was receiving his wages by him. He has also denied the suggestion that he had 
admitted before the conciliation officer that he was disengaged by the Contractor Gouranga Charan Das. 


Il. W.W.-2 Sri Niranjan. Das has deposed that he was working as Assistant Engineer in PHD Department, ECM 
Division of Paradip Port Trust and the concerned workman namely Shri Bhagaban Das was working under his 
supervision since !992. He has also deposed that after his retirement. Bhagaban Das continued to work on same 
profile on contractual basis in the same department by the order of the Chairman of Paradip Port Trust. He has further 
stated that Sri Bhagaban Das was a hard working person and his ability to work as Pump Operator was most 
satisfactory and he had issued 4. certificate on 24.3.998 to Bhagaban Das in this regard. He has also deposed that 
Bhagaban Das was well known to him as Pump Operator at Brundaban Colony Water Supply Pump and he was 
equally paid wages along with other DLRS in the Paradip Port Trust. He has also stated that at the time of his 
retirement Bhagaban Das was engaged at Balighara Water Treatment Plant but he and other !7 workers from 
Balighara Water Treatment Plant were illegally disengaged in the year 2004. 


In the cross examination he had deposed that he was not the appointing and disciplinary authority of the 
[॥ Party-Management and he was a regular employee of the [* Party-Management. He has also stated that there is a 
recruitment rules and provisions of appointment to various posts in  Party-Management and the post of Pump 
Operator is a feeder post as well as promotional post. He has also stated that he has no knowledge about the eligibility 
criteria of holding the post of Pump Operator. He has also deposed that he had issued an experience certificate to the 
277 party-workman since he was working under him before 998. He has also stated that he had issued experience 
certificate as per Form No. 5 prescribed by the 7 party-Management as no service book was opened for the 
274 party-workman because he was not a regular staff. He has also stated that he was not authorized by the 
Management to issue certificate and he had not issued the experience certificate in official capacity. 


2. On the other-hand on this issue the M.W.- Sri Binayak Pradhan has deposed that the concerned workman 
had not been appointed by the Paradip Port Trust and he was not posted at Brundabana Colony Water Supply Pump 
house by the I Party-Management. He has also deposed that the concerned workman and seventeen others were 
working under the contractor, sohe —_ was not an employee of the |‘ Party- Managements and there isno “employee 
and employer” relationship between the 2™ party-workman and the I“ Party-Management. He has further stated that 
the schedule of the reference is erroneous as the workman has already mentioned the name of _ the contractor 
Gouranga Charan Das in subject matter of the representation, so the case of termination and back wages with interest 
along with penal interest till the date of reinstatement can be ascertained from the contractor only. He has also 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5979 


deposed that there is no question of disengagement or termination of the concerned workman as he was not an 
employee of the Management No. |. 


In the cross examination by the workman he has denied the suggestion that the concerned workman was 
appointed as daily wager and he was_ working directly under the control and supervision of the Assistant Engineer 
of the Management and was paid wages He has admitted that the services of the workman were hired through a 
contractor and he was paid wages through the said contractor. He has also deposed that he could say that the 
concerned workman was working since 3!.07.987 to .I.2005 as he was hired through different contractor. He has 
also stated that he could not say that the concerned workman had worked for 240 days in every calendar year and he 
was removed/disengaged from job without compliance of the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial 
Disputes Act. 


3. Now coming to the documentary evidence it appears that Ext.-l is the certificate issued by the Assistant 
Engineer, PHD PPT mentioning therein that Shri Bhagaban Das is working as a valve Operator as Brundabana 
Housing Colony Pump House and now working as such at Balijhara Water Plants. It has also mentioned in the said 
certificate that the concerned workman knows the operation of heavy Electric Pump Sets as well as Diesel Engine 
Pump Sets installed in different pump house at Paradip Port Trust. Ext.-2 is the copy of the I-Card of Bhagaban Das 
mentioning his department/Section as PHD, Employer-Paradip Port Trust and the date of issue as 28.0.!997 and 
Ext.-C is the subscription receipt issued by the Paradip Port & Dock Mazdoor Union. 


4. Now after analysing the oral evidence of both the parties on this issue the Tribunal finds that there is 
consistent evidence that the concerned workman was working under the |* party-management since |..99] on 
payment of wages which was revised from time to time and he was__ disengaged from service on 27.7.2004. Further, 
the [7 Party-Management _has tried to establish that the workman was working under a contractor G.C. Das, but 
surprisingly the Management has neither filed nor produced any document to show that the [7 Party-Management had 
engaged a contractor for engaging labourers/workers for running the Pump House in Paradip Port Trust. Moreover, 
the Management has not brought on record the labour license, it has obtained for engaging casual labourers through 
contractor as per C.L(R & A) Act. 


5. It is important to mention here that the workman has been defined ७/$ 2(s) of Industrial Dispute Act. The 
Section 2(s) of I.D. Act reads as follows:- 


“workman” means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any manual, 
unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms 
of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in 
relation to करा industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or 
retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or 
retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not include any such person- 


(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 950 (45 of 950), or the Army Act, 950 (46 of 950), or the 
Navy Act, l957 (62 of 957); or 


(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a person, or 
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity, or 


(iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding (ten thousand rupees) per 
mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers 
vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature 


6. At this stage it is relevant to mention here that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in a case as reported in 20I] 
LAB. I. C. 2799 (S.C) has been pleased to observe as follows:- 


“_|4., It is apposite to observe that the definition of workman also does not make any distinction between 
full-time and part-time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the plain 
language of Section 2(s) from which it can be inferred that only a person employed on regular basis or a 
person employed for doing whole-time job is a workman and the one employed on -temporary, part- 
time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a 
workman. 


5. Whenever an employer challenges the maintainability ground that the employee is not a workman 
within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act, what the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal is required to 
consider is whether the person is employed in an industry for hire or reward for doing manual, unskilled, 
skilled, operational, technical or clerical work in an industry. Once the test of employment for hire or 
reward for doing the specified type of work is satisfied, the employee would fall within the definition of 
“workman”. 


7. It is required to mention here that the concerned workman namely Sri Bhagaban Das had worked in the 
establishment of the Paradip Port Trust as Pump Operator on payment of wages so he was employed in the 


5980 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


management of PPT on hire and consequently he was a workman. In view _ of such, there is a relationship between 
concerned workman and the management as employee and employer, so there is an Industrial Dispute. 


After considering all the facts and circumstances of the case Issue No. I & II are decided in favour of the 27 
party-workman and against the management of Paradip Port Authority. 


ISSUE NO. TI 


8. It is relevant to mention here that the word “retrenchment” has been defined under section 2(00) of the I.D. 
Act, definition of continuous service has been mentioned u/s 25-B of I.D. Act and the condition precedent to 
retrenchment have been mentioned u/S 25 F of I.D Act. 


Section 2(00) of the I.D. Act reads as follows:- 


Section 2(00)-“retrenchment” means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any 
reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action but does not 
include- 


(a)Voluntary retirement of the workman; or 


(b) Retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment 
between the employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or 


(bb) Termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of contract of employment 
between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under 
a stipulation in that behalf contained therein; or 


(c)Termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health. 
The Section 25-F of the Industrial Dispute Act reads as follows:- 


25-F Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen- No workman employed in any industry who has 
been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that 
employer until- 


(a) The workman has been given one month’s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment 
and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the 
period of the notice: 


(b) The workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days’ average pay (for Every completed year of continuous service) or any part thereof in excess of 
six months; and 


(c) Notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government (or such authority as may 
be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette.) 


25-B. Definition of continuous service — For the purpose of this Chapter:- 


({) a workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock-out or —_a cessation of work which is not due 
to any fault on the part of the workman; 


(2) Where a workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (() for a period of one year 
or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer- 


(a) for a period one year, if the workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than — 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a workman employed below ground in a mine; and 


(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


9. Now in this case there is categorical evidence that the concerned workmen had worked in Paradip Port Trust 
as Pump Operator since 99] continuously till 27.07.2004 so he had worked under the management of Paradip Port 
Trust for more than 240 days in each and every calendar year. Therefore, the concerned workman was in continuous 
service under the management of Paradip Port Trust as per definition mentioned u/s 25-B_ of 
ID. Act. Moreover, there is also evidence that the concerned workman was removed from his service w.e.f. 
27.07.2004. Further there is no evidence before the Tribunal that the concerned workman had been given any notice 
in writing indicating the reasons for his retrenchment/ removal or had been paid compensation equivalent to 5 days 
of average pay as per provision of 25-F of the I.D. Act. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 598] 


20. Hence, in view of above the discussion the Tribunal finds and holds that the 27 party-workman had been 
working as Pump Operator on payment of wages and he had been removed from service w.e.f. 27.07.2004. 
Further the action of the management in terminating the services of concerned workmen w.e.f. 27.07.2007 is not legal 
and justified. Hence the concerned workman is entitled for relief. 


ISSUE NO. IV 


2]. The Tribunal has already decided in this case that the concerned workman Sri Bhagaban Das had been 
working as Pump Operator on payment of wages in the Paradip Port Trust since his appointment and he was 
terminated from the service w.e.f. 27.07.2004 without being given any notice of retrenchment which is not legal and 
justified. 


22; Now, the termination of service of the 2" party-workman is not justified and legal, so he is liable to be 
reinstated, in service if he has not attained the age of superannuation as per rules of the |7 Party- Management. As the 
matter of termination relates back to the year 2004, nearly 2 years back, it will not be justifiable if he was given back 
wages, but he was surely entitled to receive compensation. Considering all the facts and surrounding circumstances 
the Tribunal thinks it proper to award an amount of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs) to the disputant-workman as 
compensation. The dictates of the award shall be complied with within two months from the date of publication of 
the award failing which the | Party-Managements shall also be liable to pay interest on the amount of 
compensation at the rate of 9% per annum. 


23. This is the Award of the Tribunal. The reference is answered accordingly. 


24. Office is directed to send the copy of the Award to the appropriate government for publishing in the official 
gazette notification. 


25: Case record be consigned to record room. 
Dictated & Corrected by me. 
DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली,  frarax, 2025 
का.आ. 7605.—sirarhts विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एचडीएफसी बैंक लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय भुवनेशवर के Gare (4/2020) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल-42042/04/2020-आई.आर.(बी-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the Ist September, 2025 


S.O. 605.—In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (44 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 4/2020) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Bhubaneswar as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of HDFC Bank 
Ltd. and their workmen. 


[No. L-202/04/2020-— IR (B-)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT BHUBANESWAR 
Present: 
Sri Dinesh Kumar Singh, 
Presiding Officer, C.G.I.T.-cum-Labour Court, 
Bhubaneswar. 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE CASE NO. 4/2020 
Date of Passing Order — 06.06.2025 


5982 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Between :- 

l. M/s. Kore Security Services (P) Ltd., 
G-7. Mezzamine Model Town - II 
Delhi — 0 033. 

2. HDFC Bank Ltd., Zonal Office, 
Patra Pada Branch, Bhubaneswar (Orissa) 


[॥ Party-Managements. 


(And) 
Sri Sulekh Kumar Majhi, 
At./Po. Nimani, Via — Bhapur, 
Dist. Nayagarh — 752 063. 
2™ Party-workman. 
Appearances: 
Sri Amulya Ranjan Singh af For the [7 party- 
Auth. Rep. Management No. |. 
None Ss For the [* Party- 
Management No. 2. 
Sri Sulekh Kumar Majhi. ... For Himself-2™ Party- 
Workman. 
ORDER 


In the present case, a reference was received from the Under Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of 
Labour vide order No. L-!202/04/2020 IR(B-D, dated 26.02.2020 under clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section 
(2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 for adjudication of a dispute, under the following schedule:- 


“Whether the management of M/s. Kore Security Services Pvt. Ltd., contractor of HDFC Bank Ltd., 
Bhubaneswar is legally bound to pay higher amount of terminal benefits under section 25-F of I.D. Act, 947 
and differential amount of wages for the period July, 208 to March, 208 to Shri Surech Kumar Majhi? If 
yes, what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2: The case of the 2™ party-workman in brief is as follows:- 


That he was engaged in the employment of watch and ward in the Zonal Office of the HDFC Bank, 
Patrapada Branch, Bhubaneswar through the — contractor, M/s. Kore Security Services Pvt. Ltd. from 8.07.208 to 
3.09.209 and he continued there without any break. He was entitled to get the benefit of Central Minimum Wages 
as per the Government of India gazette notification but during the service period he was being paid the minimum rate 
of wages as was fixed by the State Government and as such he was being paid Rs. 8000/- for thirty days work. In the 
mean while in course of his working all of a sudden he was terminated from his service by the Management No. 2 
with effect from 0.04.209 without any terminal benefits/notice pay as per I.D. Act. He requested several times to 
the Management for his reinstatement and payment of unpaid differential minimum wages and retrenchment benefits, 
but the Management did not respond. He had raised a dispute before the labour machinery and on failure of 
conciliation proceeding the present reference has been made. 


The 2" party-workman has prayed to pass an award directing the Management for his reinstatement and to 
pay him terminal benefits along with differential wages. 


3. On the other hand, though the Management No. | M/s. Kore Security Services (P) Ltd. has appeared but not 
filed any written statement. The Management No. 2 has not yet appeared and filed any written statement in this case 
in spite of several opportunities given to it. 


4. However, during the course of adjudication, both the 27 Party-Workman and the [ Party-Management No. 
| have settled the present dispute out of court and filed original copy of their Memorandum of Settlement in Form — H 
containing certain terms & conditions as agreed between them in this dispute with signatures of workman, authorized 
representative of the [7 Party-Management No. | and one witness. Submitting their Memorandum of Settlement, 
both the 277 party-workman and Management No. Ihave prayed the Tribunal to close this case in terms of the 
settlement arrived at between them. The terms of Memorandum of Settlement executed between Sri Sulekh Kumar 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5983 


Majhi (270 Party Workman) and Sri Amulya Ranjan Singh (Authorised representative of the [7 Party Management 
No. l) are as under. 


Ue That, the Management agrees to pay a sum of Rs. 20,000/- (Rupees Twenty Thousand Only) to the 
workman Sulekh Kumar Majhi as full and final settlement of all claims, dues and demands in connection with his 
past employment with the Management No. |. 


2. That, the Workman accepts the above mentioned sum in full and final settlement of all claims and has no further 
grievance or demand against the Management and undertakes not to raise any further dispute in any court or forum 
in relation to this matter. 


5. Considering the facts and circumstances and the submissions of the stake holders of this case, the Tribunal is 
of the opinion that whatever dispute was existing between the 27 Party-Workman and the I‘' Party-Managements, the 
same have already been settled and no further adjudication is required under the Act. 


6. Hence, this order is passed in terms of the Memorandum of Settlement arrived at between the 2™ Party- 
Workman and the ।7 Party-Managements. The Memorandum of Settlement filed by the parties in this case forms part 
of the order. 


7. This is the Order of this Tribunal. 
Dictated &Corrected by me. 
DINESH KUMAR SINGH, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4606.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, adtate-i, के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 46/2000) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/09,/ 2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a4. Teat-20072/500/999-srg. 3. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


9.0. 606.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 46/2000) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/500/999-— IR (CM-D)] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL २०0., DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 46/2000 
Employer in relation to the management of Putki Colliery of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 


Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 
Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate. 
For the workman. :- Sri R.R. Prasad, Ld. Advocate 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 3/08/2025 


5984 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/500/999- IR(C-I) dated 0/03/2000 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Putki Colliery of M/s BCCL and their workman through Secretary, Rashtriya Colliery 
Mazdoor Sangh, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the demand of the Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh to designate Sri Bharat Sharma as 
Loading Supervisor is proper and justified? If so, to what relief is the workman entitled and with what 
consequential benefits and from what date?” 


2 At the outset it is important to mention that previously this reference case was decided against the workman 
by this tribunal vide Award dated 8..I5 but when the same was challenged by the workman before the Hon’ble 
Jharkhand High Court in W.P.(L) No.2535 of 206, the Hon’ble Court vide his Lordship’s order dated 26.09.22, was 
pleased to set aside the impugned Award dated 8..!5 holding the same as cryptic and remitted back this case for 
taking a decision in accordance with law after giving due opportunity to the parties. 


3. The case of the workman/union as per the written statement is that he was initially employed as Mining Sirdar 
and being impressed by his efficient work the management engaged him as Loading Supervisor for bringing 
improvement of the standard and quality of loading appreciating his merit and efficiency which he showed during his 
continuous employment of several years since 988. Subsequently the concerned workman was issued a copy of letter 
No. CI/ADA(WB) dated 25.7.88 which was sent to the Manager of Pootki Colliery of BCCL by Commercial 
Manager, S.E. Railway., Adra and by this letter the concerned workman amongst others was cautioned against 
overloading of wagons at Pootki Colliery Depot to be sent to Bhojudih Coal Washery. Vide office order No. 3 
dated 3.05.9, the concerned workman was sent to attend training programme in Kustore Club. He was also 
nominated and sent in the capacity of Loading Supervisor to participate in seminar on Coal Quality Improvement held 
at Moonidhi on 2.8.93 which is evident from office order No. 252 dated 9" August 93. Again by office order No. 
955 dated 7.3.94 the concerned workman was released for attending training programme on quality circle in the 
capacity of Loading Supervisor. Vide letter No. 66 dated .7.994 also it is evident that the concerned workman 
working as Loading Supervisor was asked by the management to submit the list of wagon loaders working under him 
with their names and other details. By another Letter No. PC/94 dated 28.0.94, he was directed by the management 
to collect the details of Weightment of wagons in the capacity of Loading Supervisor. After being diverted from the 
post of Mining Sirdar from 988 to work as Loading Supervisor, the concerned workman was stopped payment of 
underground allowance and charge allowance for quite a long time, putting him to heavy loss but when he requested 
orally as well as through written representations to regularize him as Loading Supervisor with proper grade because 
of his working for several years on the said post of Loading Supervisor undergoing heavy loss due to stoppage of 
payment of underground allowance and charge allowance to him, the management did not attend the same, the 
industrial dispute was raised for regularizing him as Loading Supervisor. The conciliation also failed due to 
management that resulted in present reference and at last it was prayed to pass award to regularize the workman Sri 
Bharat Sharma as Loading Supervisor in T & S Grade-A from !989 with all consequential benefits as per NCWA and 
grant other reliefs as this Tribunal may deem fit and justified. 


4. On 25.07.2006 the management filed written statement cum rejoinder submitting therein that the present 
reference is not maintainable. Sri Bharat Sharma, an employee of Pootkee Colliery was originally employed as 
C.C.M. helper in Category-IV and subsequently on the basis of his Mining Sirdarship Certificate, he was promoted as 
a Mining Sirdar in Technical & Supervisory Grade ‘C’ and was accordingly paid salary of Mining Sirdar in that 
grade. On the basis of his designation and request, he was upgraded in Technical & Supervisory Grade-B as per 
NCWA-V. The concerned workman never worked or employed as Loading Supervisor and as such the demand of the 
union to designate the workman as Loading Supervisor is false. 


5. In rejoinder the management has submitted that the contents of Para-| of the W/S of the workman are terms 
of reference hence not denied. Regarding contents of Para-2 and 3 of the W/S of the workman it is stated that he 
worked as a Mining Sirdar but it is denied that he was ever employed as Loading Supervisor. The contents of Para 4 
to 8 of the W/S of the workman are matters of record. The contents of Para 9 of the W/S is denied as baseless and 
false. The workman raised the dispute before the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C), Dhanbad in 997 whereas he is 
claiming the relief from 989, which is contrary to the facts of the case and it was prayed that the demand of the union 
to designate Sri Bharat Sharma as Loading Supervisor be held as not proper and not justified and he is not entitled to 
any relief. 


6. Rejoinder on behalf of the union/workman to the written statement of the management has also been filed on 
25.09.2008 in which it was submitted that the averments made in Para | of the W/S of the management is true and 
correct, hence admitted. The contents of Para 2 of the W/S of the management is neither true nor correct and 
misleading, hence denied. The present reference is legally maintainable. The contents of Para 3and 4 of the W/s of the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5985 


management are matters of record, hence admitted. The averments made in Para 5 of the W/S of the management is 
misleading and contradictory, hence denied. It is submitted that the management have assigned the job to perform 
duty as Loading Supervisor on vacant and sanctioned post of Loading Supervisor from July 988 of their own. The 
concerned workman has raised objection due to stoppage of Underground Allowance and Charge Allowance which 
are privileges in vogue for the performances of Mining Sirdar. It has further been submitted that the concerned 
workman’s designation was Mining Sirdar, working since 984 and he was transferred from Pootkee Colliery to 
Balihari Colliery in the same capacity of Mining Sirdar till August 988 and thereafter the management diverted the 
duty of the workman into the Loading Supervisor to perform his job of the same and since then he is continuously 
doing his duty in the same capacity, Apart from the same the management has issued several office order in which the 
designation of the workman has been as Loading Supervisor. Thus he was performing his duty as the job assignment 
of Loading Supervisor since 988 duly engaged to perform his duty as such and therefore the concerned workman is 
legally entitled for regularization in the post of Loading Supervisor with Pay Scale of T & S Gr. A and other 
consequential benefits. His demand is proper, legal and justified and it was prayed to consider the same. 


7. In support of his case the workman Bharat Sharma has examined himself as WW-I. 
8. He has also got Exhibited the following documentary evidence: 
Exhibit W-l- Office Order of BCCL, Pootkee Colliery dated 0.0.984. 
Exhibit W-2- Office Order of BCCL dated .7.987. 

Exhibit W-3- Office Order of BCCL dated 2.7.987. 

Exhibit W-4- Office Order of BCCL dated 24.6.987. 

Exhibit W-5- Office Order of BCCL dated 2.4.993. 

Exhibit W-6- Office Order of BCCL dated 9.8.993. 

Exhibit W-7- Letter of BCCL dated 28.0.994. 

Exhibit W-8- Office Order of BCCL dated 23.2.2006. 

Exhibit W-9- Office Order of BCCL dated 3.0.2007. 

Exhibit W-0- Office Order of BCCL dated 06.08.2008. 

Exhibit W-l- Application by Bharat Sharma dated 3.2.88. 

Exhibit W-2- Application by Bharat Sharma dated 7.09.989. 

Exhibit W-3- Letter of Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh dated 22.04.997. 


9. The management has not adduced any evidence in support of his case. 
0. Heard both sides and perused the materials on record. 
ll. The Ld. Counsel for the workman has submitted that the workman Sri Bharat Sharma was initially appointed 


as Mining Sirdar in Tech. Grade-C and posted at Balihary Colliery vide office order dated 0.0i.984 and thereafter 
he was deployed to work as Loading Supervisor since |988 and he performed the duty of Loading Supervisor well till 
his retirement on 30.06.20i3. During this tenure the workman participated in Seminar as Loading Supervisor. Several 
office orders were issued by the BCCL in which his designation was shown as Loading Supervisor. Vide direction 
passed in W.P. (8) No. 2!27/2007 by the Hon’ble Jharkhand High Court, the management had to allow him his duty 
as Loading Supervisor working as mining sirdar but ultimately at the time of his superannuation on 30.06.20I3 he 
was retired with designation Mining Sirdar. Neither he was regularized even after working for such a long period on 
the post of Loading Supervisor nor any salary or any consequential benefits for the same was given and at last he has 
prayed to direct the management to regularize the workman, Bharat Sharma at the post of Loading Supervisor in 
Technical and Supervisor Grade-A Pay scale/wages and other consequential benefits since 989. 


2. On the other hand the Ld. Counsel for the management has submitted that the workman Sri Bharat Sharma 
was originally employed as C.C.M. helper in Category-IV and subsequently on the basis of his Mining Sirdarship 
Certificate he was promoted as a Mining Sirdar in Technical & Supervisory Grade ‘C’ and ultimately he was paid 
salary of Mining Sirdar in Technical & Supervisory Grade-‘B’ on the basis of his designation and request. A mining 
Sirdar is promoted to the post of Overman after passing departmental examination and so the demand of the union to 
regularize him and designate him as Loading Supervisor is unjustified and the concerned workman is not entitled to 
any relief as demanded. He has already retired in the year 20I3 and received all the retiral benefits and therefore, 
prayed to dismiss the reference case. 


3. Admittedly the workman Bharat Sharma was originally employed as C.C.M. helper in Category-IV and later 
on he was promoted as Mining Sirdar in Supervisory Grade ‘B’. It further transpires that the workman got 
superannuated on 30.06.203 with the same designation of Mining Sirdar. 


5986 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4. The claim of the workman Bharat Sharma is that though previously he was working as Mining Sirdar but 
from the year 988 the management started taking the work of Loading Supervisor from him and even after his 
request the management did not regularize him nor given him the designation of Loading Supervisor and so he has 
claimed for regularization at the post of Loading Supervisor, though the management has denied this claim in his W/S 
submitting that the workman Bharat Sharma was never employed as Loading Supervisor. 


On perusal of documentary evidence of the workman in support of his submissions it transpires that Exhibit 
W-I is the office order of BCCL dated 0.0.984 which reveals that the workman Sri Bharat Sharma, Clerk of 
Pootkee Colliery was promoted as Mining Sirdar in Technical Grade ‘C’ and posted at Balihari colliery was released, 
Exhibit W-2 is the office order dated 0.07.987 of BCCL and on its perusal it transpires that the workman Bharat 
Sharma was working as Mining Sirdar and was transferred to Putkee Colliery, Exhibit W-3 which is office order of 
BCCL dated 02.07.987 it further reveals that the workman Bharat Sharma was permitted to join at his new place of 
transfer at Putkee Colliery since 0.07.987, Exhibit W-4 is the Office order dated 24.06.987 of the BCCL which 
reveals that the workman Bharat Sharma, Mining Sirdar was transferred to Putkee Colliery and he was directed to 
report for duty to Agent, Putkee Colliery after his release. 


5. Now as regards the documentary evidence that the workman has adduced in support of his claim that he was 
working as Loading Supervisor and therefore he is entitled to be regularized and designated as such, on perusal of 
Exhibit W-5 which is office order of BCCL dated 02.04.993, it transpires that the same has been written by D.R. 
Gupta, Officer on Spl. Duty to the General Manager, P.B. Area regarding joint findings of derailment and it transpires 
that copy of the same has also been sent to Bharat Sharma in which his designation has been mentioned as 
L/Supervisor. Likewise on perusal of Exhibit W-6 which is office order of the BCCL dated 09.08.993 it transpires 
that some officers/staff have been nominated to participate in Seminar on Coal Quality Improvement to be held at 
Moonidih on !2.08.993 and out of whom the workman Sri Bharat Sharma is also one of the nominated participant 
and a copy of the same has also been sent to him with the designation L/Incharge, Pootkee Colliery, Exhibit W-7 is a 
letter dated 28.0.994 of BCCL written by the Project Officer, Putkee Colliery to the Chief Controller, S.E. Rly, 
Bhojudih in which it has been mentioned that the workman Sri Bharat Sharma was being sent with this letter to 
collect the weighment of wagons and in this letter also the designation of Bharat Sharma is mentioned as Loading 
Supervisor, Exhibit W-9 is the Office order of the BCCL dated 3.0i.2007 in which it has been mentioned that 
considering the representation of Sri Bharat Sharma, Mining Sirdar working as Loading Supervisor of Pootkee 
Colliery, the office order dated 23/27.2.2006 issued by the then Project Officer was kept-in-abeyance till further 
order and on perusal of Exhibit W-8 which is office order of the BCCL dated 23.]2.2006 it transpires that by this 
order the Project Officer had transferred the workman, Bharat Sharma, Mining Sirdar working as Loading Supervisor 
to Gopalichak Colliery and was directed to contact the manager of the same but it further transpires that it was stayed 
by Exhibit W-9 which is another office order of BCCL dated 3.0.2007 and in this document also the designation of 
the workman Bharat Sharma has been mentioned as Mining Sirdar working as Loading Supervisor. On perusal of 
Exhibit W-0 it transpires that this is an office order of the BCCL dated 06.08.2008 in which it has been mentioned 
that in pursuance of the order of the Hon’ble High Court Jharkhand, Ranchi dated 4/5.2.2008 in WP(S) No. 
227/2007 and subsequent approval, the designation of Sri Bharat Sharma shall be read as mentioned in Annexure-0 
of the writ petition and on perusal of the case record it transpires that the same is Mining Sirdar working as Loading 
Supervisor. 


6. Exhibit W-] is a hand written letter dated 3.2.988 by Bharat Sharma, Mining Sirdar working as Loading 
Supervisor to the Agent, Pootkee Colliery in which he has requested that he was working as Mining Sirdar but for 
some time the work of Loading Supervisor was being taken from him and accordingly his charge allowance and 
underground allowance has been stopped by which he was suffering too much and so he requested to allow him to go 
to his work as Mining Sirdar. Likewise Exhibit W-2 is also hand written letter by Bharat Sharma dated 7.09.989 
by which he has requested that he was being taken the work of Loading Supervisor and his underground allowance 
and charge allowance was stopped causing him loss but he was not permitted to go to his work and at last it was 
requested to designate him as Loading Supervisor or compensate him. But as against these both Exts.(Ext.W-l] & 
Ext.W-2), in his Cross-examination, WW-l, Sri Bharat Sharma has admitted that it is a fact that he refused to work 
as Mining Sirdar when he was asked to work as such. 


7. Ext.W-3 is the letter dated 22" April 997 which appears to have been written by the Vice President, 
Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh to Shri A K Gupta, Director (P), BCCL, Koyla Bhawan Dhanbad in which he has 
raised the issue of diversion of some workers from one cadre to the other and also objected the payment of 
underground and charge allowances to them. 


8. As regards the oral evidence, the workman Bharat Sharma who has been examined as WW-| has testified 
that previously he was working as Mining Sirdar at Pootkee Colliery but thereafter the management engaged him to 
perform the duty as Loading Supervisor since |988 and since then he has been performing his duty as such. During 
this period he was also authorized to participate in seminar as Loading Supervisor. During this period his underground 
allowance and charge allowance was also deducted causing him irreparable loss. He has been performing the job of 
Loading Supervisor against the sanctioned and vacant post with the approval of competent authority since 989 and 
therefore he is entitled to receive pay scale and differences of wages of T & 8 Grade-A since [989 with designation 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5987 


confirmation and consequential benefits. In the cross-examination he has admitted that his designation is Mining 
Sirdar. The job of Mining Sirdar is Supervisory. He supervises the work of safety in the mines and it is a fact that he 
refused to work as Mining Sirdar when he was asked to work as such. A Mining Sirdar after passing examination gets 
promotion to over man. Loading Supervisor’s job is supervisory job. He does not know about cadre post and he does 
not know in which cadre he was working. 


9. On perusal of the above materials and documentary evidence adduced from the side of the workman as well 
as oral testimony of the workman it transpires that the workman Bharat Sharma was initially appointed as CCM 
helper in category- IV and there after on l0.0I.84 he was promoted at the post of Mining Sirdar in Tech grade 
C(Ext.W-) and he continued to work as such but it further appears that thereafter the management started taking 
from him the work of Loading Supervisor(Ext.W-5 to Ext.W-0) and that is why in all the above mentioned exhibited 
documents, the designation of Loading Supervisor or Mining Sirdar working as Loading Supervisor has been 
mentioned with the name of Bharat Sharma but the workman Bharat Sharma has himself admitted in his cross- 
examination as WW-Ithat after passing examination, a Mining Sirdar is promoted to the post of Overman and so it is 
self evident that when the workman has not taken and passed any examination, he has no legal right to demand the 
relief of regularization/designation on the post of Loading Supervisor which does not come in the channel of 
promotion and which is a post beyond the cadre of safety and mining operation in which he was initially appointed 
and secondly, the workman has stated in his examination-in-chief as WW-Ithat he has been performing the job of 
Loading Supervisor against the sanctioned and vacant post with the approval of competent authority but he has failed 
to adduce any documentary evidence showing any order/approval of his appointment/ promotion to the post of 
Loading Supervisor which is a post of different cadre and so it appears that he was only officiating at the post of 
Loading Supervisor and only because of his officiating, the workman has no legal right of regularization to the post of 
Loading Supervisor. 


20. The Hon’ble Apex Court have been pleased to hold in case of Ramanuj Prasad Vs. Coal India Ltd and 
Others reported in 2004 Supreme Court Cases (L&S) 264 that claim based on officiation in the promotional post 
in the absence of order of promotion passed in favour of the employee, he has no legal right to the said post.” 
2i. Thus on the basis of the above discussion of entire oral as well as documentary evidence and materials on 
record as also following the above authority of the Hon’ble Apex Court this tribunal finds and holds that the workman 
has failed to prove his entitlement of designation/regularisation to the post of Loading Supervisor and so the demand 
of the Rashtriya Colliery Mazdoor Sangh to designate Sri Bharat Sharma as Loading Supervisor is neither proper nor 
justified and so he is not entitled to any such relief. 

Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India, 
New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. (607.—sieifre विवाद अधिनियम, .947 (4947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार सेंट्रल सिल्क बोर्ड, खरसवां, सरायकेला के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 


निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, Adale-l, के पंचाट 
(संदर्भ dea 39/2006) को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04,/09,// 2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल- 20072/423/2004-arg sik. (Al. TH-])] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


S.O. 607.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 38/2006) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
Central Silk Bord,Kharswan ,saraikela and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/23/2004— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S [0 Cl) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 38/2006 
Employer in relation to the management of Central Silk Board, Kharswan, Saraikela. 


5968 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri Nitish Sahay, Ld. Advocate. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Textile 


Dated 3/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-4202/23/2004-(IR(CM-ID) dated 4/02/2006 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Central Silk Board, Saraikela and their workman Shri Sur Singh Hembram for 
adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the management of Central Silk Board in denying regularization of services of 
Shri Sur Singh Hembaram is legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-4202/23/2004-(IR(CM-II)) dated 4/02/2006 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 38 of 2006 was registered on 24.02.2006 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After issuance of regd. notice, none appeared on behalf of the workman. It further transpires from the case 
record that when the case record was put up after a long gap, registered notices were sent on 20.l2.202] to the parties 
and thereafter no step was taken from the side of the workman. Whereas management appeared on some dates but the 
workman never appeared before the Tribunal since 24.02.2006, though on 04.07.2025, Sri Nitish Sahay, Ld. 
Advocate appeared for the management. 


4. On perusal of the entire case record it transpires that the workman never appeared before this Tribunal for a 
period of !9 years which shows that the workman has lost his interest in this case and therefore, for the ends of 
justice, this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 


5. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4608.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-4, के पंचाट (संदर्भ Wem 58/205) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/09/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. एल-20042/424/2045-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


S.O. 608.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 58/205) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5989 


cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/2/20I5— IR (CM-D] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 () (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 58/205 
Employer in relation to the management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 


Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 3/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-2002/2/20I5 (IR(CM-D) dated 03/l!/20I5 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad and their workman through Central Secretary, 
Jharkhand Colliery Mazdoor Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the management of Bhowra(N) Colliery of M/s BCCL in dismissing Shri Bablu 
Rai, pers. No. 0300890, Ex-Miner Loader from the services of the company vide order no. PS/(N)/ 
UG. Mines/05/593, dated 06/07.06.2005 is justified and fair? To what relief the concerned workman is 
entitled to?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/2/20I5 (IR(CM-D) dated 03//205 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 58 of 20I5 was registered on 02.!2.20I5 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After issuance of regd. notice, Sri Bhuwan Rewani, Central Secretary of workman/union appeared on 2.05.206 
and filed letter of authority as also the written statement on behalf of the sponsoring union but after 23.06.20l6 he 
failed to appear before this Tribunal, whereas Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate appeared from the side of the 
management and filed his letter of authority on 27.07.206. It transpires that written statement and rejoinder has been 
filed by the management on 05.07.20!7. On 5.l.206, Sri Balmiki Prasad, Advocate appeared for the 
workman/union and filed his letter of authority. Thereafter both parties appeared till 27.02.2020 after that 
workman/union failed to appear before this Tribunal. However, Sri D.K. Verma, Advocate on behalf of the 
management appeared but the workman/union never appeared before the Tribunal since 2020. 


4. On perusal of the entire case record it is transpires that the workman never appeared before this Tribunal for a 
period of 5 years which shows that the workman has lost his interest in this case and therefore, for the ends of justice, 
this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 


5. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


5990 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4609.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, adate-l, के पंचाट (संदर्भ wen 80/20I4) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/09,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. एल- 20072/7/204-ang.2m8. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


S.O. 609.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 80/204) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/7/20i4— IR (CM-D] 

SALONI, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 Cl) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 80/204 
Employer in relation to the management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 


Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri Dhiraj Kumar, Legal Inspector. 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 3/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/7/20i4 (IR(CM-I)) dated 4/08/20l4 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of E.J. Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Joint General Secretary, Bahujan 
Mazdoor Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the Management of Patherdih Colliery under EJ. Area of M/s BCCL in 
dismissing Sri Tapan Roy, Ex-M/Loader from the services of the Company vide office order 
dated 2/27-Nov. 2008 is fair and justified? To what relief the concerned workman is entitled to?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/7/20l4 (IR(CM-I)) dated 4/08/204 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 80 of 204 was registered on 26.08.204 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After issuance of notice, none appeared on behalf of both the parties. The case record shows that this case was put 
up after a long gap and the regd. notices were issued to both parties on 7.0.2022 and Sri R.R. Ram, Representative 
of the workman appeared on 25.04.2022 but thereafter failed to appear. However management did not appear before 
this Tribunal since 204. Though on 04.07.2025, Sri Dhiraj Kumar, Legal Inspector appeared for the management but 
the workman failed to appear. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 599] 


4. It transpires from the case record that workman neither appeared before the Tribunal since the year 2022 nor any 
step was taken on his behalf which makes it clear that workman has lost his interest in this case and therefore, this 
Tribunal is of the opinion that this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 


5. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4640.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, Adate-i, के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 08/20I2) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/09,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. एल- 20042/45/2044-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


S.O. 60.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 08/202) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/45/20] |-- IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 Cl) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 08/20I2 


Employer in relation to the management of Kusunda Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri N. Nath, O.S. Legal H.Q 
For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 3/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No.L-2002/45/20ll (R(CM-D) dated 20/2/20l has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Kusunda Area of M/s. BCCL and their workman through Secretary, Rashtriya Colliery 
Mazdoor Sangh, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


5992 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“Whether the action of the management of Dhansar Colliery of M/s BCCL in not regularizing Sri 
Mohan Prasad in the post of Despatch Clerk, though he has been performing the said job for the last 
several years with due authorization is fair and justified? To what relief the workman concerned is 
entitled to?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/45/20l! (R(CM-D) dated 20/2/20l! Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 08 of 202 was registered on 06.0!.202 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities, W/S, rejoinders and 
subsequently evidences. It further appears that after 20I7 this case was put up after a long gap on !4.02.2022 and 
registered notices were issued to both the parties but both the parties failed to appear before this Tribunal. Though on 
04.07.2025, Sri N. Nath, O.S Legal H.Q on behalf of the management appeared but workman/union did not appear 
since the year 207 which shows that workman/union has lost his interest in this case and therefore, this Tribunal is of 
the opinion that the case deserves to be dismissed due to non prosecution. 


4. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 644.—aiteifre विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, Atate-i, के Gare (संदर्भ Wear 28/205) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/09,// 2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. Tet-2002/53/205-3rg. 38. (सी.एम-)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


S.O. 6.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 28/205) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/53/20i5— IR (CM-D] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 28/205 


Employer in relation to the management of Lodna Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 
Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5993 


Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri S.N. Ghosh, Ld. Advocate. 


For the workman. :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 3/08/2025 
AWARD. 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/53/20I5 (IR(CM-D) dated 07/07/20!5 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Lodna Area of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad and their workman through Central Secretary, 
Jharkhand Colliery Mazdoor Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“Whether the action of the Management of North Tisra Colliery under Lodna Area of M/s BCCL in 
dismissing Shri Hemlal Mahli, Pers. No. 0294920, Ex-M/Loader from the services of the company, 
vide letter No. BCCL/NTC/2004/PER/33, dated 6/26.07.2004 is fair and justified? To what relief 
the concerned workman is entitled to?” 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/53/20l5 (IR(CM-IJ)) dated 07/07/20I5 Government of India, Ministry of Labour, 
New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 28 of 20I5 was registered on 7.07.205 and thereafter 
the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and the witnesses. 


3. After issuance of regd. notice, Sri Bhuwan Rewani, Central Secretary of workman/union appeared on !2.05.206 
and filed letter of authority as also the written statement on behalf of the sponsoring union and after 23.06.20l6 he 
failed to appear before this Tribunal, whereas Sri U.N. Lall, Ld. Advocate appeared from the side of the management 
and filed his letter of authority on 27.07.206. It transpires that written statement and rejoinder has been filed by the 
management on 25.0!.20l7. After a long gap on 9.04.20l7, Sri Balmiki Prasad, Advocate appeared for the 
workman/union and filed his letter of authority. Thereafter both parties appeared till 5.2.207 after that 
workman/union failed to appear before this Tribunal. It further transpires that after a long gap this case was put up on 
0.03.20i9 and regd. notices were again sent to the parties but workman/union failed to appear before this Tribunal. 
However, Sri U.N. Lall, Advocate on behalf of the management appeared. After 28.05.209, Sri S.N. Ghosh, 
Advocate appeared on behalf of the management on 20.06.20l9 and filed his letter of authority, thereafter he 
continued to appear before this Tribunal but the workman/union never appeared before the Tribunal since 208. 


4. On perusal of the entire case record it is transpires that the workman never appeared before this Tribunal for a 
period of 8 years which shows that the workman has lost his interest in this case and therefore, for the ends of justice, 
this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 


5. Hence, 
ORDERED 


that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up in respect of the 
above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 4642.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार बी सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, Adate-l, के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 04/209) 
को प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 04/09,/2025 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[a. एल- 20042/86/2048-आई.आर. (सी. एम-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


5994 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 


9.0. 62.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 04/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-l as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL. and their workmen received by the Central Government on 0/09/2025. 


[No. L-2002/86/208— IR (CM-I)] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL २०..,०प५७४३ ५॥) 


In the matter of reference U/S 0 () (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 04/209 


Employer in relation to the management of Govindpur Area No.III of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad. 
AND. 
Their workman. 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate. 
For the workman  :- Sri शाप Mondal, Representative 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Dhanbad 
Dated 0/08/2025 
AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of Section l0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947) Government Of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2002/86/208-(IR(CM-I)) dated 03/2/208 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer i.e. management of Govindpur Area No.II of M/s BCCL and their workman through Asstt. General 
Secretary, Jharkhand Janta Mazdoor Union, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


“i) Whether the action of the management of Jogidih Colliery under Govindpur Area of M/s BCCL in 
dismissing Sri Tulsi Bouri, Ex. Line Helper vide order dated 9/3.04.20] is fair, proper and justified? 


ii) If not, what relief concerned workman is entitled to and from which date? And what other 
directions are required in this regard.” 


2: The case of the workman namely Sri Tulsi Bouri as per his WS, is that he was a permanent employee of 
Jogidih Colliery under Govindpur Area of M/s. BCCL working as Line Helper and keeping unblemished record of 
service. On 26.05.20i0 he was unable to perform his duty due to sickness and reported the same to the management. 
After recovery he reported to the management to allow him to resume his duty with Medical Certificate but the 
management of Jogidih Colliery did not allow him to resume his duty illegally and issued a charge sheet dated 
7/2.06.200 to him for commission of misconduct as per the Certified Standing Order clause 26.!.!. The workman 
has not committed any misconduct as mentioned in the Certified Standing Order of the company. The charge sheet 
was issued with a view to deal the absence for minor punishment. The workman was unable to perform his duty 
because he was under treatment. The enquiry was conducted without giving him proper notice and he was not given 
opportunity to defend his case. Principle of natural justice was not followed during the enquiry and so the same is not 
fair and proper and ultimately the Project Officer of Jogidih Colliery of M/s BCCL illegally dismissed him vide 
dismissal order dated 9/3.04.20l whereas he was appointed by the General Manager. As per Clause 27.2.6 of the 
Certified Standing Order no order of discharge or dismissal from service shall be made by an authority lower than the 
appointing authority of the workman. The Project Officer is lower in rank than the General Manager, hence he was 
not competent authority to pass the order of dismissal of the workman and so the order of dismissal is non-est and 
liable to be set aside. The Disciplinary Authority has not disposed of the appeal as per the provisions of Certified 
Standing Order which is violation of the provision of clause 30 of the Certified Standing Order. The management as 
per decision taken in FDs meeting issued instruction vide letter No. 067-67 dated 20.03.20I2 to reinstate the ex- 
employees who were dismissed on the ground of long absenteeism during the period 0.0i.2000 to 30.I!.20il. The 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5995 


workman fulfilled all such criteria and applied for the same as per circular before the management but he was not 
considered arbitrarily and illegally. As per FDs Decision he was entitled for reinstatement. The punishment of the 
dismissal for his unauthorized absence is shockingly disproportionate and at last it was prayed to hold the dismissal of 
the workman as illegal and unjustified and direct the management to reinstate him with full back wages. 


3. On the other hand the management filed written statement cum rejoinder on 20.05.209 before the Tribunal 
submitting therein that the present reference is not maintainable. The concerned workman was dismissed from the 
service of the company w.e.f. 09.04.20, whereas the sponsoring union raised the present dispute after lapse of more 
than 7 years from the date of dismissal and so_ the dispute is stale dispute and not maintainable and not fit for 
adjudication. The sponsoring union has got no locus standi to raise the dispute in respect of individual workman. 
According to Section 2A of the I.D. Act, !947 the dismissed employee can raise an industrial dispute in respect of his 
dismissal within three years from the date of dismissal. No explanation has been submitted by the workman regarding 
the delay of 7 years. The workman Tulsi Bouri was employee of Jogidih Colliery of Govindpur Area as Line Helper 
but he started absenting from his duty without permission and information of the management w.e.f. 26.05.200. He 
remained absent without information and permission of the management which is the misconduct as per clause 26.. 
of the Certified Standing Order. The Disciplinary Authority issued a charge sheet on 7/2.06.200 to the workman 
concerned with direction to submit his explanation but the workman did not submit his explanation to the said charge 
sheet as such finding no alternative the Disciplinary Authority appointed Enquiry Officer to conduct domestic enquiry 
in respect of aforesaid charge sheet. Thereafter the Enquiry Officer issued several notices to the workman concerned 
to appear before him to defend his case but he did not appear, therefore finding no alternative the Enquiry Officer 
conducted Ex-parte enquiry and submitted his report holding therein that the workman concerned is guilty of the 
charges. Thereafter the Disciplinary Authority issued second show cause notice to the workman concerned but the he 
did not submit any reply to the same and thereafter considering his past record and report of the Enquiry Officer, the 
Disciplinary Authority dismissed the workman concerned from the services of the company w.e.f. 9/I3.04.20I. The 
concerned workman is a habitual absentee. In the year 2008 his total attendance was 6! days, in the year 2009 his 
total attendance was [20 days and in the year 200 his total attendance was 86 days. It proves that the workman 
concerned was not serious about his job. It has further been submitted that the dismissal of the workman concerned is 
legal and justified. The enquiry conducted by the Enquiry Officer is fair and proper and is in accordance with the 
principles of natural justice. The fairness of the domestic enquiry may be decided in a preliminary hearing and if it is 
found that the enquiry is not fair and proper, management may be allowed to adduce evidence afresh. 


4. In its rejoinder, the management has submitted that the statement made in Paragraph | and 6 of the written 
statement of the workman is a matter of record. He was habitual absentee. On several occasions, he was allowed to 
resume his duty with strong warning but in spite of that he absented himself from duty without information and 
permission of the management. The statement made in Paragraph 3, 4 and 5 of the written statement of the workman 
are not correct. As per rule every workman is required to report medical officer of the company about his sickness and 
only medical officer of the company can grant sick leave, but the workman concerned never reported about his 
sickness to the medical officer of the company. The statements made in Paragraph 7 to 33 of the written statement of 
the workman are not correct and not relevant and lastly it was prayed to hold that the action of the management of 
Jogidih Colliery under Govindpur Area of M/s. BCCL in dismissing Sri Tulsi Bouri, from the service is legal and 
justified and further the workman concerned is not entitled to get any relief. 


5. It is pertinent to mention here that the concerned workman has admitted the domestic enquiry as fair and 
proper vide application dated 05.0i.202! that was held by this Tribunal as fair and proper vide order dated 
4.2.202]. 


6. In support of his case the workman has adduced the following documentary evidence:- 


Exhibit W-- Photo Copy of letter dated 09/3.04.20ll of Project Officer of Jogidih Colliery of BCCL 
addressed to Sri Tulsi Bouri regarding order of dismissal from service. 


Exhibit W-2- Photo Copy of letter dated /06/20l0 of Tulsi Bouri addressed to Project Officer, Jogidih 
Colliery regarding Joining Report. 


Exhibit W-3- Photo Copy of Medical Certificate from 26.05.200 to 0.06.20l0 of Tulsi Bouri issued by Dr. M. 
Prasad, MBBS, MS General Physician & Surgeon, Saraidhela ( Dhanbad). 


Exhibit W-4- Photo Copy of Service Record of concerned workman namely Tulsi Bouri 


Exhibit W-5- Photo Copy of I.D. Card of concerned workman Tulsi Bouri issued by BCCL, Govindpur Area- 
Il. 


Exhibit W-6- Photo Copy of Letter dated 02/08/203 of Tulsi Bouri addressed to Director of Koyla Bhawan 
BCCL regarding mercy appeal to contribute to the work. 


Exhibit W-7- Photo Copy of Circular of Management dated 20/03/20l2 addressed to All Areas General 
Managers. 


Exhibit W-8- Photo Copy of Certified Standing Order. 


5996 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


7. In support of its case the management has adduced the following documentary evidence: - 
Exhibit M-- Photo Copy of Office order dated 08/0/200 for appointment of Enquiry Officer. 
Exhibit M-2- Photo Copy of Charge-sheet dated 7/06/200. 
Exhibit M-3- Photo Copy of Notices of Enquiry dated 8//200, 04/7.2.20l0 & 28/0/20I]. 
Exhibit M-4- Copy of Enquiry Proceeding and report. 
Exhibit M-5- Copy of Note-Sheet dated 25.03.20]. 
Exhibit ॥-5/- Copy of Second Show Cause Notice dated 25.02.20. 
Exhibit M-6- Copy of order of dismissal dated 09/3.04.20. 


8. The Ld. Counsel for the applicant/workman has submitted that he was a permanent employee of Jogidih 
Colliery under Govindpur Area of M/s. BCCL and was working as Line Helper but on 26.05.20I0 he fell ill and 
therefore he could not perform his duty and gave information of the same to the management but even after that he 
was issued charge sheet by the management on !7/2.06.200 due to his absence from duty for minor punishment but 
ultimately the management dismissed him vide order dated 9/3.04.20ll. The Order of dismissal is shockingly 
disproportionate and prayed to hold that the dismissal is illegal and direct the management to reinstate him with full 
back wages. 


9 The Ld. Counsel for the management has submitted that the concerned workman was dismissed on 
09.04.20I whereas the sponsoring union raised the dispute in the year 208 ie after lapse of 7 years from the date of 
dismissal and therefore the dispute is stale and not maintainable. He has further submitted that the workman Tulsi 
Bouri was working as Line Helper in Jogidih Colliery of Govindpur Area and he absented himself from his duty 
without permission and information to the management w.e.f. 26.05.20l0 and therefore charge sheet was issued for 
his misconduct on !7/2.06.200 but he did not submit any explanation/reply and ultimately finding no alternative the 
enquiry was conducted Ex-parte and he was held guilty of the charges. Thereafter second show cause notice was 
issued but the workman again did not file any reply and ultimately he was dismissed on his service w.e.f. 
9/3.04.20I. The concerned workman was habitual absentee. In the year 2008 his total attendance was 6! days, in 
the year 2009 his total attendance was |20 days and in the year 200 his total attendance was 86 days and thereafter 
the dismissal of the workman concerned is legal and justified and prayed to dismiss the reference as not maintainable. 


0. Points for Consideration 

(i) Is the domestic enquiry fair and proper? 

(ii) Is the reference of the applicant stale and so not maintainable? 

(iii) Is the dismissal of Sri Tulsi Bouri fair, proper, justified and proportionate? If not, what relief the concerned 


workman is entitled to? 


ll. As regards the first point, the workman has already admitted the enquiry as fair and proper by filing petition 
dated 05.0!.202 and accordingly this Tribunal has also held the enquiry as fair and proper by accepting the petition 
of the workman vide order dated !.!.202] and so this point is decided accordingly. 


2. As regards the second point, on perusal of the case record it transpires that the workman Tulsi Bouri was 
dismissed by the management vide order dated 9/3.04.20I] and it further transpires that his case was brought before 
this Court by reference vide order dated 03.2.208 of the Government of India, Ministry of Labour i.e. after 7 years 
of the dismissal and on perusal of the provisions of the I.D. Act, !947, it is evident that there is no fixed time limit for 
reference of the industrial dispute u/s l0 of the I.D. Act, 947 to the Industrial Tribunal and it says that where the 
appropriate government is of opinion that any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, it may at any time, by order 
in writing refer the dispute. 


Considering the above facts, circumstances and provisions of the ID Act 947, it is held that the reference 
of this case is not stale and is well maintainable and this point is also decided accordingly. 


3. Now, as regards the third point i.e. whether the dismissal of the workman is fair, proper, justified 
and proportionate, though on perusal of Exhibit M-5 which is copy of note sheet and Ext.M/I which is 2™ show cause 
notice it appears that the workman was absent for 6] days in the year 2008, 20 days in the year 2009 and 86 days in 
the year 20!0 but there is no evidence on record to prove as to for the above alleged absence during three consecutive 
years, the workman was ever given any punishment or any enquiry was held for the same. Not only this, even the 
dismissal order dated 3.04.!] which are Ext M-6 and Ext. W-I, do not even whisper about the alleged previous 
absence of the workman during 3 consecutive years for certain period and therefore he can not be said to be a habitual 
absentee. 


As regards the other documentary evidence of the management, Ext.M-! is the office order dated 8.0.0 
by which enquiry officer has been appointed for departmental enquiry against the workman Tulsi Bouri in respect of 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5997 


his charge sheet, Ext.M-2 is the copy of charge sheet dated 7.06.200 issued against the workman Tulsi Bouri for his 
alleged absence from duty without information and permission, Ext.M-3 is the fade copy of notice dated 8..0 by 
which the workman has been informed next date of the proceeding, Ext.M-4 is proceeding of the enquiry against the 
workman in which it appears that the workman did not appear, Ext.M-5 is the note sheet and Ext.M-5/I is 2™ show 
cause notice and both these documents also show the previous absence of the workman during 3 consecutive years for 
certain days though there is no evidence on record for any action or punishment given to the workman for the said 
absence and Ext.M-6 is the dismissal order dated 3.04.!l which reveals that the workman Tulsi Bouri was dismissed 
on the ground of his habitually and deliberately being absent without reasonable cause though the management has 
failed to adduce any evidence on record to prove as to how the workman was habitual absentee when he was not 
given any warning nor he was ever punished earlier for the same. Likewise Ext.W-| is the same as Ext.M-6 ie 
dismissal order dated |3.04.ll and it has already been discussed above. Ext.W-2 which is application of workman 
and Ext.W-3 which is medical report of the workman have lost their usefulness and importance as the workman has 
already admitted the fairness of the enquiry report. Ext.W-4 & W-5 are illegible and not of much importance in the 
facts and circumstances of this case. Ext.W-6 is the copy of mercy appeal dated 2.08.3 given by the workman to 
Director Personnel, Koyla Bhawan, BCCL, Ext.W-7 is the photocopy of circular dated 20.03.2 and Ext.W-8 is the 
photocopy of Certified Standing Order. 

Thus on the basis of above facts, circumstances and discussion of evidence on record, this tribunal 
finds and holds that the charge of absence of the workman namely Tulsi Bouri from his service duty since 26.05.l0 
without information and permission of the management is proved but there being no evidence on record regarding 
previous warning or punishment of the workman, he can not be held to be a habitual absentee and in view of his long 
unblemished record of service since |.0!.992, the action of the Management of Jogidih Colliery under Govindpur 
Area of M/s BCCL in dismissing Sri Tulsi Bouri, Ex.Line Helper vide order dated 9/3.04.l] is neither fair nor 
proper rather it is unjustified and quite disproportionate to the misconduct of the workman and hence the same is 
liable to be set aside. The workman shall not be entitled to any back wages though he shall be entitled to all other 
consequential benefits treating the period of his absence from duty as Dies Non. 

Hence 
ORDERED 
That this case is allowed on contest against the management of BCCL and the order of dismissal dated 
9/3.04. of the workman namely Tulsi Bouri is hereby set aside and the Management of BCCL is directed to 
reinstate the workman Tulsi Bouri without back wages in the service of the Company within three month from the 
date of receipt of a copy of the Award. The workman shall be entitled to all other consequential benefits treating the 
period of his absence from duty as Dies Non. 


Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, Government of India, 
New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 2 सितम्बर, 2025 


का.आ. 643.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 


आईएनएस राजाली, नौसेना वायु स्टेशन के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय चेन्नई के पंचाट (60/205) प्रकाशित करती है। 
[सं, एल-44042/07/2045-आई.आर. (बी-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 2nd September, 2025 
S.O. 63.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (44 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 60/205) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Chennai as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of INS Rajali, Naval Air 
Station and their workmen. 
[No. L-402/07/205— IR (B-)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL- CUM - LABOUR COURT, 
CHENNAI 
Date: 24-07-2025 
Present: SUSHIL KUMAR-II, 
PRESIDING OFFICER 
Industrial Dispute No. 60/205 


5998 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


BETWEEN 
Smt. M.Chokhubai, 
W/o. Shri Vajiram, 
57/A, Ambedkar Nagar, 
Mosur, Ambrishapuram, 
Ekhu Nagar Post, 
Arakkonam Taluk, 
Vellore-63! 00I. : [7 Party/Petitioner 
AND 
The Commandant, 
INS Rajali, Naval Air Station, 
Camp Post, Akash Ganga, 
Arakkonam-63! 006. : II Party/ Respondent 


Appearance: 
For the |* Party/Petitioner : M/s. V.Ajoy Khose & 


S.Manogaran, Advocates 
For the Respondent : Mr. R.Kumar, Advocate 
AWARD 


The Central Government, Ministry of Labour & Employment vide its Order No. L-402/07/20i5-IR(DU) 
dated .05.205 referred the following Industrial Dispute to this Tribunal for adjudication. 


The schedule mentioned in that order is: 


“Whether the action of management of INS Rajali, Arakkonam_ regarding termination of the service of 
petitioner Smt. M.Chokhubai is justified or not? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


2. The above Industrial Dispute has been earlier disposed off by this Tribunal vide its order dated 3.2.205. 
Aggrieved by the order, II Party Management has filed an appeal before the Hon'ble High Court of Madras in 
W.P No. 6937 of 206. The Hon’ble Court vide its order dated 06.04.20I8 & 04.2.208 has remitted the matter back 
to this Tribunal for re-opening and adjudicating the matter afresh by providing opportunity to the parties and pass 
order on merits in accordance with law. 


3. The averments made in the Claim Statement filed by the petitioner are as below: 


The Officers of INS Rajali formed a committee, approved by the Respondent to appoint casual workers such as 
sweepers, security guards, etc. The petitioner was appointed as sweeper through NAVAL Akashganga Committee 
from July 992 and had worked till 02..2007. The petitioner and her co-workers were allocated duty to cut grass, 
sweep, clean, etc. in the school playground, swimming pool, gym and children's park, etc. by the Management Staff. 
She was also allocated work as Messenger. She had put in continuous service of 5 years. The last wages paid to her 
was Rs.!,300/- per month. The petitioner represented before the Management for a rise in the pay. Rather than 
listening to the petitioner and considering her request, the representatives of the Respondent abused her and treated 
her in an unjust and unfair manner. The petitioner was terminated from service on 02.!.2007 orally. The work of the 
petitioner was permanent, perennial, continuous and regular in nature. The termination of the petitioner is in violation 
of Section-25F and Section-25H of the Industrial Disputes Act. The petitioner is entitled to be reinstated in service. 
An order may be passed directing the Respondent to reinstate the petitioner with continuity of service, back wages 
and all other attendant benefits and also to absorb her as permanent/regular worker in the rolls of INS Rajali Naval 
Air Station and to extend all benefits as applicable to regular Group "D" Staff. 


4. The respondent/management in its counter statement submits that there is no employee-employer 
relationship between the Petitioner and Respondent. A number of residential colonies namely sailors married 
accommodation, officers accommodation and welfare activities centre were constructed in the premises of INS Rajali 
Naval Air Station, Arakkonam, Tamil Nadu. These areas generally covered by heavily wild grass and other vegetation 
plants, therefore, occupants in the aforesaid colonies formed local committee and decided to go for hiring people from 
open market for grass cutting and cleaning of the aforesaid accommodation area as no manpower provision exists 
from the Government source for undertaking such kind of job/work. The claimant and others were employed by 
local committee only and no way connected to the respondent Defence establishment. Salary to these temporary 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 5999 


workers appointed by the local committee has been paid from the contribution made by the residents of the 
residential accommodation / quarters. The local committee consists of Naval Officers/Sailors who were occupying 
the residential accommodation, used to fix contributions to be made from time to time. The committee changes 
when the transfer of individuals holding accommodation. 


5. The Respondent further submits that there are no appointments to the posts such as sweepers, security 
guards and gardner etc. for maintenance of these premises such as school, playground, swimming pool and children 
park. The committee never followed any procedure or recruitment rules for engaging these temporary workers, such 
workers were engaged to work four to five hours per day on part-time basis. No payment was made by the Central 
Government, such workers were not followed attendance system. Therefore, there is no relationship of master and 
servant exist between the Central Government and these temporary workers, as they have been engaged by the local 
committee of residents of officers/sailors accommodation quarters. The colonies were well developed after some time 
and the Petitioner’s employment was no longer required. Hence, the Petitioner’s services were discontinued in the 
year 2003. The respondent further submits that there is no relationship of employer-employee exist between the 
respondent and Petitioner. Hence, the provisions Industrial Disputes Act is not applicable. 


Witnesses Examined: 
For the First Party Petitioner : WWI Ms. M.Chokhubai 
For the 277 Party/Management : ७०७४] Commander Susheel Dhyani 


Documents Marked: 


On the Petitioner’s side: 


Ex.No. Date Description 

Ex.Wl जल Temporary passes issued by 27" Party to the | Party 

Ex.W 2 Pil Payment vouchers receipts for the period from 0.06.992 
to 2003. 


Ex.W3__| 27.08.998 | Proposal for increase in the monthly wages to the casual 
employees including |* Party. 


Ex.W4 | | Representation made by Petitioner to the Hon’ble 
President of India 


Ex.W5 a Petition filed by the ॥7 Party before the Conciliation 
Officer, Chennai. 


Ex.W6 | 26.03.20I4 | Counter filed by the Conciliation by the 2™ Party . 
Ex.W7 | 24.09.20I4 | Failure Report 
Ex.W8 | I!.05.20I5 | Order of reference. 


Documents Marked: 


_On behalf of Respondent/Management 


Ex.No. Date Description 


Ex.M | ail Ty pass issued for entering the base (two pages) 
Ex.M 2 30..2007 HQ ENC letter CE/952 
Ex.M3 0.08.2008 INS Rajali letter WK/38/GEN/I 


6. The points for consideration are as under:- 
(i) Whether the termination of service of the Petitioner by the Respondent is justified? 
(ii) What if any, is the relief to which the Petitioner is entitled? 


7. For proper adjudication of these above mentioned two points for consideration, all of first, we have to 
consider the definition of ‘workman’. The ingredients of definition of workman may be described as - 


6000 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


i) The claimant has to prove that she was employed in any industry / she was employed by the respondent. 
ii) The respondent comes under the definition of ‘industry’. 


8. The document submitted by the claimant marked as W2, is a payment receipt document to the claimant and 
other co-workman. The documents have stamp as ‘S.M.A OFFICE, INS RAJALI’. The question arises is what does 
it mean the word “S.M.A Office”. The term “S.M.A Office” refers to ‘Station Maintenance Activity Office’ for INS 
Rajali. This S.M.A. Office is under the control and management of the Commanding Officer . The S.M.A. Office is 
part of the station infrastructure. As per affidavit of the claimant, she had put in continuous service of l5 years. The 
last wages paid to her was 5.,300/- per month. As per Exhibit No.W2, in March, 2003, the Petitioner has received 
7६. ,|25/- as wages. Though the Petitioner has stated that she had worked with the respondent until 2007, but 
vouchers for the period subsequent to 2003 are not filed by the claimant. However, Ex.W6, in the counter claim, 
which was filed by the Respondent before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, would show that Petitioner was 
working with the Respondent upto this period. 


9. The respondent claimed that contribution amount collected by the occupant residents of married 
officers/sailors for the maintenance of residential premises and the payment was made to the claimant from the 
collected contribution money. But, this fact is not proved. The respondent failed to adduce any documentary 
evidence on record to show that payment was made to the claimant from out of the contributed fund collected from 
the occupants of the residential accommodation/ quarters of officers/sailors. 


0. Ex.WI is a temporary pass issued in favour of the claimant, which shows that she was entitled to enter the 
premises which was under the control of the respondent. 


Il. Therefore, as per discussion above, there was relationship between the claimant and the respondent as 
workman and employer. Furthermore, the payment vouchers shown that the respondent has also paid bonus to the 
Petitioner. All these are sufficient to show that Petitioner was working with the respondent as casual labourer during 
the period 992 to 2007. 


2. This fact is established by the Petitioner through her affidavit that she was disengaged by the respondent 
without prior notice and without following the provisions of section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947. The 
provisions of section 25F reads as under:- 


“25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen. 


No workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an 
employer shall be retrenched by that employer until- 


a)the workman has been given one month 's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the 
period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the 
notice. 


(b)the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen 
days’ average pay [for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of six months; 
and 


(c)notice to Government — the employer is also required to serve notice on the appropriate Government 
authority before retrenchment . 


3. Continuous service — Section 25F of the Act applies to the employees, who have been in continuous service for 
at least one year. Now, in the case of Petitioner, the claimant has served from the year 992 to 2007. The provisions 
of compensation under this section is intended to mitigate the hardship faced by the employee Petitioner upon 
retrenchment. 


4. Now, I have to discuss one more aspect of this case. The claimant was terminated from service in the year 
2007, but she raised the Industrial Dispute only in the year 203. Further taking into consideration of the Petitioner’s 
age factor i.e., 57 years old, I am of the view that the Petitioner is not entitled to reinstatement into service. However, 
the Petitioner is entitled to get compensation as per provisions of section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, 
and also additional compensation of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees two lakhs only), because provisions of section 25F of 
the Act were not complied with by the respondent. 
5. Accordingly, the Industrial Dispute raised by the Petitioner is allowed and the respondent is directed to 
pay the claimant equivalent to fifteen days average pay along with interest @ 6% per annum from the date of 
retrenchment till the date of payment. The respondent is further directed to pay the claimant additional compensation 
of Rs. 2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs only) for not complying with the provisions of section 25F of the Act within 
three months, if not paid within three months, interest @ 6% per annum will be payable from the date of filing the 
Industrial Dispute before this Tribunal, till the date of payment. Ordered accordingly. 

SUSHIL KUMAR-IL Presiding Officer 
(Dictated and transcribed by PA and 
corrected and pronounced in the open 
court on this day the 24.07.2025) 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 600[ 


नई दिल्ली, 3 सितम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. 4644.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पंजाब नेशनल बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय पटना के tare (Ref.l0(C ) of 2024) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल-39025/04/2025-आई.आर.(बी-ा)-29] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 3rd September, 2025 


S.O. 64.—In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (44 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Ref. 0 ( C ) of 2024 ) of the Indus. Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Patna 
as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Punjab National Bank and 
their workmen. 


[No. L-39025/0I/2025- IR(B-II)-29] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
Before the Presiding Officer, 
Industrial Tribunal, Patna. 


Reference Case No.:- 0 (C) of 2024 


Between the management of (l) Zonal Manager, Punjab National Bank, Zonal 
Office, Chankya Palace, ‘R’Block, Patna-80000(2) The Circle Head, Punjab National Bank, 
Circle Office, Aghoriya Bazar, Muzaffarpur-842002 And Their workman Sri Deepak Kumar 
represented through the General Secretary, Punjab National Bank Employees Union ( Bihar ), 
S.K. Puri, A.N. College, Patna-80003. 


For the management:- Mr. Zaki Ahmad, Chief Manager, PNB, C.O 


Muzaffarpur. 
For the Workman:- Mr. B.K. Mishra, General Secretary, 
Punjab National Bank Employees Union, 
Bihar. 
Present:- Manoj Kumar Sinha 
Presiding Officer, 
Industrial Tribunal, Patna. 
AWARD 


Patna, dated-_3i* July, 2025 


By the adjudication order no.- /ID/(07/2024/Dy.CLC Patna, dated- 8.06.2024 the Govt. of India, Ministry 
of Labour & Employment, Office of the Dy. Labour Commissioner (0), Maurya Lok Complex, A Block, 2" Floor, 
Room No.- 6,!6, & 7 Patna-80000! Patna has referred under sub-section-(5) of the section-!2 read with sub-section- 
(2A) of section-0 of the Industrial Dispute 


Act, 947, ( hereinafter to be referred to as “the Act’), the following dispute between the management of (l) 
Zonal Manager, Punjab National Bank, Zonal Office, Chankya Palace, ‘R’ Block, Patna-80000(2) The Circle Head, 
Punjab National Bank, Circle Office, Aghoriya Bazar, Muzaffarpur-842002 And Their workman Sri Deepak Kumar 
represented through the General Secretary, Punjab National Bank Employees Union (Bihar), S.K. Puri, A.N. College, 
Patna-80003 for adjudication to this tribunal:- 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the demand of the union from the bank management to revoke the prolong suspensionof Sri 
Deepak Kumar, head cashier which is in continuance in violation of Bank Guidelines / Circulars on the 
matter of suspension is legal, fair and justified? If yes, then what relief the workman Sri Deepak 
Kumar is entitled to?” 


6002 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


2. After receiving of the reference, notices were issued to both sides. The workman appeared through General 
Secretary of Punjab National Bank Employees Union, Bihar and has filed his statement of claim on 06.08.2024, the 
management / bank has also filed their objections on 05.09.2024. 


3. It is fair as well as reasonable to note here that during pendency of the proceeding, General Secretary namely Sri 


Bijay Kumar of Punjab National Bank Employees Union, Bihar has filed written application dt- 03.07.2025 stating 
therein that the suspension of the workman Deepak Kumar has already been revoked and he has been posted at 
Dumari Manjhi Branch as CSA copy of the letter dt- 5..2024 issued by Dy. Circle Head of HRD department, 
Circle Office, Muzaffarpur, has also been filed. 


4. It is equally fair as well as reasonable to note here that the workman Deepak Kumar is present physically in the 
court today and on asking he has supported the contention of the application dt- 03.07.2025 filed on his behalf by the 
General Secretary. The workman has also been examined today and during his presence in the witness box he has 
identified the writing and signature of Bijay Kumar Mishra on the application dt- 03.07.2025 and the same has been 
marked as Ext.-W. The workman has deposed in clear voice that he has already joined at Dumari Manjhi Branch on 
5..2025 and he is working there, he has also said that he does not want to proceed in this case and has prayed to 
close the proceeding. The representative of the management / bank has no objection. 


Now taking into consideration the above fact along with the circumstances on record, it is obvious that it is a case of 
no dispute and as such an award of “No Dispute Award” is 


the requirement of this reference.. Thus this tribunal pass “ No Dispute Award “ accordingly, which shall be effective 
after the date of publication in the gazette. 


Dictated & Corrected by me. 
3.07.2025 
MANOJ KUMAR SINHA , Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 3 सितम्बर, 2025 
का.आ. (645.—sirearthts विवाद अधिनियम, i947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
यूको बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजकों और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय पटना के Gare (Ref.9 ( 0) of 208) प्रकाशित करती है | 


[सं. एल-42044/79/2048-आई.आर. (बी- ID] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 3rd September, 2025 


S.O. 65.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Ref.9 ( C ) of 208 ) of the Indus. Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Patna 
as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of UCO Bank and their 
workmen. 


[No. L-20/79/208- IR(B-II)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
Before the Presiding Officer, 
Industrial Tribunal, Patna. 


Reference Case No.:- 9 (C) of 208 


Between the management of (l) Deputy General Manager, UCO Bank, Zonal Office, Maurya Lok 
Complex, Block ‘A’ 4 Floor, Dak Bungalow Road, Patna -80000! (2) The Senior Manager, UCO Bank, At & PO- 
Surajgarha, Distt. Lakhisarai, -8!!l06 ( Bihar ) And Their workman Shri Indradeo Paswan, Part Time Sweeper 
represented through The State Secretary, UCO Bank Employees Association, Bihar State Committee, Saboo 
Complex, qu Floor, Exhibition Road, Patna — 80000] Bihar. 


For the management:- Mr. Praveen Kumar, Advocate. 

For the Workman:- Mr. B. Prasad, State Secretary, UCO Bank 
Employees Association. 

Present:- Manoj Kumar Sinha 
Presiding Officer, 


Industrial Tribunal, Patna. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 6003 


AWARD 


Patna, dated-_i'" August, 2025 


By the adjudication order no.-L-20/79/208-IR(B-ID) dated- 30..20I8 & 5-04-.20l9 the Govt. of 
India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi has referred under clause (d) of sub-section-() and sub-section-(2A) of section- 
0 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947, ( hereinafter to be referred to as “ the Act”), the following dispute between The 
management of है है कै] 9 :| ०।॥0 


General Manager, UCO Bank, Zonal Office, Maurya Lok Complex, Block ‘A’ 4" Floor, Dak Bungalow 
Road, Patna (Bihar)-80000! (2) The Senior Manager, UCO Bank, At & PO- Surajgarha, Distt. Lakhisarai, (Bihar)- 
806 And Their workman Shri Indradeo Paswan, Part Time Sweeper represented through The State Secretary, 
UCO Bank Employees Association, Bihar State Committee, Saboo Complex, 278 Floor, Exhibition Road, Patna ( 
Bihar ) — 80000] for adjudication to this tribunal:- 


“ Whether the action of the management of UCO Bank, in not regularizing services of Shrilndradeo 
Paswan, Peon / Part Time Sweeper, working at Surajgarha Branch, Distt. Lakhisarai, is justified? If not, to 
what relief the workman concerned is entitled to?” 


2; After receipt of the adjudication order, the reference was registered, notices were issued to the parties and in 
compliance the workman Sri Indradeo Paswan as well as the management of UCO Bank appeared and filed their 
statement of claim and written statement respectively. The rejoinder has also filed on behalf of the workman through 
his representative. 


3. The laconic facts of the case of workman Indradeo Paswan ( hereinafter referred as workman ), as reveals 
from his statement of claim, is that he was appointed orally by the management of the bank to discharge the duties of 
a peon / sweeper at Surajgarha Branch w.e.f 30..2005, he has performed his duties from 0 A.M to 6 P.M regularly 
and some times worked even after 6 P.M as per instruction of the Branch Manager, initially the workman was paid 
Rs. 50/- per day as wages subsequently the amount was raised @ Rs. 200/- per day plus 34/- per day and no wages 
were paid for Sunday and holidays. Further case of the workman is that after his appointment, he used to discharge 
the duties of sweeping of the branch premises, taking out registers from the Almirah and place them on different 
tables as well as counters and also vice-versa, he is also performing the work of stiching of vouchers as well as 
currency notes, distribution of Dak through peon book, posting of mails in the post office, serving water to the staff, 
taking out cash box from strong room and placing the at cash counter. It has further been pleaded that there were no 
permanent peon at Surajarha branch since last several years and the workman was performing his duties against a 
permanent post of peon for over 3 years but his case for regularization has not been considered. In the year 20i2 
names of daily rated worker or part time sweeper working upto 3.03.20l2 were called for by the head office of the 
bank and accordingly names of the workman was forwarded by the branch to the Zonal Office of the bank. It has also 
been contained that during the period, large number of fresh hands were appointed as peons and part time sweeper but 
the case of the workman was not considered which is neither legal nor justified and the action of the management 
constitute unfair labour practice. Accordingly it has been prayed by the workman for regularization of his services as 
house keeper cum peon along with payment of regular wages for the working period as well as Sundays and holidays. 
A payment of a some of Rs. l0,000/- has also been prayed for contesting the case. 


4. The management of UCO Bank, Zonal Office, Patna and Senior Manager of UCO Bank Surajgarha branch, 
Lakhisarai ( hereinafter referred as management ) has filed their written statement on 29.05.20l9 wherein it has 
specifically been mentioned that the dispute was raised before the Regional Labour Commissioner (C) at Patna, Bihar 
and conciliation took place and as such this case is not maintainable before this tribunal. It has further been pleaded 
that relief for regularization in service cann’t be claimed under Industrial Dispute Act, 947 ( hereinafter referred as 
the Act ). The further case of the management is that the workman was engaged for the purpose of cleaning of the 
premises occasionally at Surajgarha branch of UCO Bank on the basis of as and when required and he worked there 
for one or two hours a day, he was engaged for part time casual work as sweeper and the same was need based 
engagement, there is a permanent peon working in the said branch, there is no provision for oral appointment nor the 
branch manager have the power to appoint any person orally. The said workman was working in absence of the 
regular part time sweeper as he was residing near by the bank and he made his presence in the branch and was 
engaged on the basis of as and when required. Therefore, there was no relation of master and servant between the 
bank and the workman. It has also been pleaded on behalf of the management that the claim of regularization is 
misconceived as under the provision of law, the tribunal can give relief to the workman only against dismissal, 
discharge and termination and that too to a proved workmen. In the case of regularization in Piyara Singh’s case the 
Hon’ble S.C ( 992 SC 230) has held that principle enshrined in Article 4 & 6 of the constitution of India cann’t 
be ignored in the case of regularization. Ad-hoc regularization / appointment has been discouraged. It has been held 
by the Hon’ble Court that if there is a need for regularization in service a scheme must be framed first and then all 
person eligible for consideration under the scheme must be considered for regularization. Besides, the above the entire 


6004 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


claim made by the workman in his statement of claim has been specifically denied by the management in their written 
statement. Accordingly it has been prayed to reject the contention of the workman. 


5. Rejoinder on behalf of the workman has also been filed on 03.07.20l9 wherein the contention of the 
management were denied and has been pleaded that the management is public sector bank which is a State within 
Article 2 of the Indian constitution. The Branch Manager are agent of the bank who discharge their duties on behalf 
of the bank, the appointment of the workman is within the knowledge of the higher officers of the bank, the wages 
were paid to the workman by the bank and workman has been discharging his duties as per the instruction of the 
branch manager and as such their exist master servant or employer and employee relationship. The action of the 
management constitute unfair labour practice and the management being a State should keep in mind the principle of 
equal pay for equal work. The case of Piyara’s Singh deals with the issue of regularization, Article l4 and 6 of 
constitution do not come in regularization as reference has been made as per the provision of Industrial Dispute Act, 
947. It has also been contented that bank has formulated scheme from time to time for permanent absorbtion of the 
services of daily rated, casual, temporary workman, who worked for 240 days in three years preceding to the 
settlement which was done in the year 989. After 2003 the management formulated scheme to regularized the 
services of part time sweeper to I/3 scale wages and converted them to full time class IV employee in 206 with 
change designation of house keeper cum peon (HKP) and the management regularized the services of more than 00 
personal drivers of the Executives of the bank who worked for more than 5 years. Services of canteen boys were also 
regularized as peons on earlier occasion. The Surajgarha Branch had two peons namely (!) Ram Chandra Mandal (2) 
Bishambhar Prasad, one part time sweeper Prabhu Ram and one Armed Guard namely C.D. Singh were also there. 
Ram Chandra Mandal was promoted to clerical cadre and other three persons I.e Bishambhar Prasad, C.D Singh and 
Prabhu Ram died. After death of Prabhu Ram his son was engaged as daily rated worker and his services were 
regularized as part time sweeper and from September-206 he has been redesignated as a House Keeper-cum-Peon. 
There is no permanent peon at Surajgarha Branch except one HKP whose duties hours is from 8.00A.M to 3.P.M. 
Accordingly it has been prayed on behalf of the workman for discharging the reference in his favour in the interest of 
justice and equity. 


6. To substantiate their claim the management has produced three witnesses namely Sri Sheotahal Ram(M.W- 
l), Sri Ravi Shankar Kumar Mishra (M.W-2) and Sri Ranjan Kumar Singh (M.W-3). Two witnesses namely Sri 
Indradeo Paswan workman himself (W.W.-l) and Sri Mohan Singh (W.W-2) were present in the witness box to 
substantiate the claim of the workman. 


7. Besides the oral evidence volume of documents were brought on record by way of exhibits on behalf of the 
workman though the same were filed by the management. On the prayer of the workman, 486 copy of payment 
vouchers from 07.0i.2006 to 02.06.208 of UCO Bank are marked as Ext.-W to W-485 and letter dt- 09.05.203 of 
UCO Bank containing particular of casual worker and sweeper along with enclosure has been marked as Ext.-W/I. 
No documents were brought on record on behalf of the management as exhibits. 


During course of arguments learned counsel appearing for the management has put reliance on the 
judgement of Uma Devi case reported A.I.R 2006 SC page-806. The representative of the workman has referred the 
judgments of Umrala Gram Panchayat Vs. The Secretary Municipal Employees Union reported in (20I5)  LLJ 403 
(SC), Shripal Vs. Nagar Nigam Ghazibad, Supreme Court Civil Appeal No.- 857 of 2024 dt- 3!.0.2025. The award 
of Industrial Tribunal, Patna in Reference Case No.- 06 (C) of 2005 and the order passed in Civil Appeal No.- 35 of 
209 arising out of SLP (C) No.- 3795 of 208 arising out of the said award as also been referred by the learned 
representative of the workman. 


8. The learned lawyer appearing on behalf of the management has assailed the contention of the workman and 
has submitted that he was engaged only for the purpose of cleaning of the premises occasionally at Surajgarha branch 
on the basis as and when required and he worked for |-2 hours a day. He 


has also submitted that he was engaged on need based and not against a vacant sectioned post of sweeper, his name 
was also not sponsored by the employment exchange therefore, he is not entitled for regularization. The learned 
lawyer has also submitted that the workman is not working at par with permanent workman, the principle of law 
regarding regularization has been affirmed in the case of Uma Devi wherein it has been held that if there is no 
sectioned post there can not be regularization. He has also submitted that the claim of regularization is misconceived 
and the onus lies upon the workman to prove that he is an employee of the bank and as such his claim for 
regularization under reference is not maintainable before this tribunal. Accordingly learned lawyer has submitted that 
the action of the management is legal and justified and the prayer of the workman is fit to be rejected. 


Per contra, the learned representative of the workman has submitted that the workman was orally appointed 
by the management to discharged the duties of sweeper / peon at Surajgarha branch and after his engagement he has 
been discharging his duties from 40 A.M to 6 P.M regularly, some times he works beyond the period on the 
instruction of the branch manager and he was paid wages accordingly for the working day only. He has further 
submitted that the name of the workman was forwarded from the branch in 203 but his case was not considered 
though the workman has been discharging his duties as badlis workman since 2005 and as such the action 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 6005 


of the management constitute unfair labour practice in view of the I.D.Act, 947. He has referred the deposition of the 
workman (४४.७४-।) and the witness Mohan Singh ( W.W-2 )and also referred various paragraph of the deposition of 
M.W-! & M.W-3 and has submitted that witnesses have also supported the contention of the workman. Accordingly, 
he has prayed to allow the prayer of the workman by discharging the reference in his favour. 


9. W.W-I is the workman himself and during his presence in the witness box he has stated that he is working at 
Surajgarha branch of UCO Bank since 30.!0.2005, he reached at the bank at 0 A.M and on the instruction of the 
branch manager performs the works of taking file and keeping them on the table of the manager, he also visit other 
branches for bring cash along with officers, he has been also performing the duty of distributing water among the staff 
of the branch, he has stated further that he performs the work of sweeper, no permanent peon was there and as such he 
has been performing the work of cash binding and various others works on the instruction of the manager. This 
witness has stated in clear voice that he has been working for !0-2 years and he is getting Rs. 350/- per day. He has 
identified his signature on the vouchers copy of which has been filed by the management on demand made by the 
workman. The said vouchers is of different dates from 07.0.2006 to 02.06.20I8 and the total number of vouchers is 
486 and they are marked as Ext.- W to W-485 during the evidence of ४७.४७-।. 


On perusal of these Exts. it is obvious that in all the vouchers the signature of the workman exists and this 
reflects that it is connected with Indradeo Paswan, the workman. Note only this on meticulous examination of all 
these Exts. iie W to W-485, this tribunal find that the amount mentioned in the vouchers were paid to Indradeo 
Paswan. Since the vouchers are volumes and as such it seems reasonable and judicious that inspite of discussing all 
the vouchers separately, a few of them for every year is to be discussed, so for the purpose of demonstration it is just 
and fair to note here that the voucher dt- 07.0.2006 Ext.-W reflects that Rs. 360/- was paid to Indradeo Paswan and 
on the back of the vouchers his signature exists with reflects that Indradeo Paswan had received the said amount from 
the management. Similar is the case with Ext.-W-l, W-2, W-3. W-4 and others. Ext.- W-5 is the voucher dt- 
06/0.2007 and on perusal of the same it is evident that Rs. 400/- were given to Indradeo Paswan and he put his 
signature on the back page as an acknowledgement of receiving of the said payment. Similar is the case with Ext.- W- 
52, W-53, W-55, W-56, W-57, W-58 and others. Ext.- W-96 is the voucher of 05.0.2008 and it reflects that Rs. 770/- 
was paid to Indradeo Paswan and it also bears his signature on the back side, reflecting about receiving of the said 
amount. Similar is the case with Exts.- W-97, W-98, W-99, W-l00 and others. Ext-W-l46 is the voucher of 
0.0.2009 and on perusal of the same it is evident that Rs. 770/- was paid to Indradeo Paswan and he put his 
signature on the back page of the voucher for acknowledging about receiving of the said amount. Similar is the case 
of Exts.- W-l47, W-l48, W-l49, W-I50 and others. Ext-W-27 is the voucher of dt- 07.0.20l2 and it reflects that 
Rs. 945/- was paid to Indradeo Paswan for the period of 0.0!.202 to 07.0!.202 and also bears his signature on the 
back page which suggest that he has received the said amount. Ext.-W-290 is the voucher of 04.0!.20l4 and on 
perusal of the same it is evident that Rs. 930/- was paid to the said workman for 30.2.203 to 04.0.204 and it also 
bears his signature, similar is the case of subsequent Exts which are of various dates of the years 204. Ext.-W-382 is 
the voucher of 02.0.206 by which Rs.!200/- was paid to Indradeo Paswan and it bears his signature, similar is the 
case of subsequent Exts which are the vouchers of various dates of the year 20l6. Ext.-W-430 is the voucher dt- 
30.0.20I8 by which Rs. 000/- was paid to the workman and it also bears his signature and from perusal of the same, 
it is evident that Rs. l000/- was paid to workman Indradeo Paswan for the period of five (05 ) days from 9.02.208 
to 23.02.208, similar is the case on subsequent Exts. On the basis of these facts along with the microscopic perusal 
of the W series Exts, it can safely be inferred that amounts were paid to the workman by the management on different 
dates for the work performed by him in the branch, all the vouchers bear the signature of the Assistant Manager of the 
branch and the signature of the workman meaning thereby that the disbursing authority i.e Assistant Manager has 
made payment of the amounts which are shown in the vouchers ( Exts.-W series ) and said amounts were received by 
the workman and in token of the same he put his signature on it. The said vouchers are from 07.0.2006 to 02.06.208 
and copy of the vouchers were produced by the management on the prayer of the workman, All the copy of the 
vouchers ( Ext.-W-series ) bears the seal of the branch along with the signature. Since these documents are filed by 
the management and he same were affirmed by the workman during his deposition as witness in the proceeding 
clearly categories these documents as sheet anchor documents to support the contention of the workman regarding the 
period of his working in the said branch for which the payment was made to him by the management as wages. 


The witness ( W.W-| ) has also been cross-examined wherein he has disclosed that he has studied up to class 
-VIII and he was working in the branch on the instruction of the manager, he disclosed the name of the branch 
manager as M. Hashmi. He has further disclosed that he got the payment for the work done by him in the bank. He 
has also disclosed that his name was forwarded by the manager to Zonal Office but he was not made permanent. The 
witness has passed the test of his cross-examination and there is nothing on record to impeach his credit as a witness 
in this proceeding. 


Not only this W.W-I has stated specifically that the then manager S.K. Verma has forwarded his name and 
details in the format and send the same to the Zonal Office along with letter and on identification by this witness, the 
letter dt- 09.05.203 along with particulars of the casual labour has been marked as Ext.-W/I. On careful perusal of 
the Ext.-W/I, it is evident that it is a letter written by the manager of Surajgarha branch to Zonal Manager, UCO 
Bank, Zonal Office, Patna on 09.05.203 giving the particulars of casual worker working as on 3.03.202 wherein 


6006 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :SEPTEMBER 6, 2025/BHADRA 5, 947 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


name of the casual worker is written as Indradeo Paswan and his date of first engagement as casual worker has been 
written as 30.0.2005, regarding his educational qualification class-VIII passed has been mentioned and the date of 
birth is 5.04.!987 and the category is shown that Schedule Caste. It also reflects the name and employment number 
of the authority allowing engagement of the said casual worker, the name of such authority is shown as M.I. Hashmi, 
Senior Manager having employment number 27359. The said format was prepared on 09.05.203 and was send to 
Zonal Manager. On bare perusal of Ext.-W/] it can safely be inferred that Indradeo Paswan was VIIIth pass and was 
engaged as casual worker on 30.l0.2005 and has been working even on 3!.0.20I2 and he is allowed to work at 
Surajgarha branch of UCO Bank by the Senior Manager namely Mr. M. I. Hashmi who has send name of Indradeo 
Paswan to Zonal Office on 09.05.203. 


0. W.W-2 is the retired manager of UCO Bank and during his evidence he has stated that he was posted at 
Surajgarha branch from July !980 to Sept. 2005 as Special Assistant and after his promotion he was posted at Tejpur 
branch and came back at Sahur branch in May-2008 subsequently he was transferred to Salaimpur branch in May 
20 and worked there up to 3!.03.203, Salaimpur branch is at a distance one K.M from Surajgarha. The witness has 
stated further that after retirement he is residing at Surajgarha and his account is there at Surajgarha branch and he is 
getting his pension from that branch itself, the account of his wife is also there in that branch, he had a seen Indradeo 
Paswan working at the branch on the instruction of the manager. The witness has supported the claim of the workman 
in clear and expressed voice during his presence in the witness box. 


II. M.W-3 is the Chief Manager of the UCO Bank and during his evidence he has disclosed that he was posted 
at Surajgarha branch and had join there on 7" July 207 as Branch Manager and worked there up to 27.06.20I8. He 
has further said that Indradeo Paswan was doing the cleaning work as well as the work of a peon in absence of the 
permanent peon Mr. Ajay Mallick posted at that branch. The witness has stated in a clear voice that usually the 
workman was working from 9 A.M to 5 P.M. he also said that payment was made to Indradeo Paswan through 
voucher under his signature and he has identified his signature over Ext.-W-467 to W-485 the payment was made 
weekly to the Indradeo Paswan. On carefully perusal of the evidence of M.W-3 it is obvious that he has admitted the 
facts that Indradeo Paswan was working at Surajgarha branch regarding which payment was made to him through 
voucher under his signature and usually Indradeo Paswan was working there from 9 A.M to 5 P.M. 


M.W-2 is the Senior Manager and during his presence in the witness box he has said that he was posted at 
Surajgarha branch from July 208 to July 202 as branch manager. The witness has disclosed the facts similar to the 
facts disclosed by M.W-3 and has corroborated his verson in his evidence during the proceeding. 


M.W-I! is another Senior Manager of the bank and during his evidence, he has stated that he was posted as 
branch manager of Surajgarha branch from 6.07.20l6 to 8.!2.207 and during that period Indradeo Paswan was 
working as daily wager, he was working as daily wager prior to that period, he was getting weekly payment. The 
witness has stated specifically that during the period of his posting at Surajgarha branch Indradeo Paswan had worked 
there regularly and he was performing the same work which is performed by the permanent peon. It is fair to note 
here that this witness, who is a Senior Manager of Scale-II rank was posted at Surajgarha branch for about one and 
half years and during that period the workman had worked regularly similar to the work performed by permanent 
peon. The witness has also disclosed that previous branch manager Mr. Sunil Kumar Verma has referred the name of 
Indradeo Paswan as casual worker to the Zonal Office, Patna. He has further disclosed that one Vishwambhar Prasad, 
who was working as casual worker at Surajgarha branch, was regularized by the bank and after his death the post is 
still is vacant, Indradeo Paswan is still working there and he (i.e M.W-! ) is making payment to Indradeo Paswan 
through vouchers. 


On careful perusal of the evidence of all these three witnesses examined on behalf of the management, it is 
evident that all these three persons are Senior Officers and they have served as Branch Manager at Surajgarha branch 
during different periods from the year 206 to 202 and all the three witnesses have admitted that Indradeo Paswan 
was working at the branch on their instruction and performed his duty for whole day and works similar to the works 
performed by permanent peon. They have also admitted about the payments which they made to the workman for the 
work performed by him in the branch. 


Now taking into consideration the above facts it is clear that the workman was engaged in perennial duties 
meaning there by his services were required by the bank and having allowed him to put in regular service to its own 
benefits for years togethers and failing to regularize the services despite long tenure, constitute unfair labour practice 
which is not permissible in a civilized society. I find my this view fortified with the recent judgment of the Hon’ble 
Apex Court delivered on 3] .0].2025 in the case of Sri Pal Vs. Nagar Nigam Ghaziabad in Civil Appeal No.- 857 of 
2025. 


Failure to regularize the services of an employee can be considered an Industrial Dispute under I.D.Act, 947 
particularly, if it involved unfair labour practice. The Act does not explicitly mandate regularization as an Industrial 
Dispute but any dispute between employer and workman connected with employment or non employment or terms of 
employment can be categories as Industrial Dispute. Regularization, which involves making a temporary employee a 
permanent one, is a condition of an employment therefore a dispute about regularization or lack thereof can fall under 
the definition of an Industrial Dispute. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 6, 2025/भाद्र 5, 947 6007 


It would not be out of place the mentioned here that the case of Uma Devi can not justify the exploitative 
approach of the bank. This case i.e Uma Devi case itself distinguish between appointments that are illegal and those 
that are irregular, the irregular appointment being eligible for regularization if it meet the required conditions. In the 
case at hand the discussions made above reflects that Indradeo Paswan was engaged as casual worker on 30.0.2005 
and he has been working in the bank for years together deserves soft treatment. The law laid down by the Hon’ble S.C 
in the case of Jaggo Vs. Union of India and others dt- 20.2.2024 in SLP (C) No.- 5580 of 2024 with SLP (C) No.- 
086 of 2024 is worth to note in this regard. 


2. In view of the above discussions, I find and hold that the action of the management of UCO Bank, in not 
regularizing services of Indradeo Paswan working at Surajgarha branch in the Dist.- Lakhisarai is arbitrary and 
unjustified, in the result it is ordered that the services of Indradep Paswan be regularized with all admissible benefits 
as permanent part time sweeper now designated as house keeper cum peon w.e.f the date of filling of the statement of 
claim of the workman ie 4.03.209. 


Award accordingly, which shall be effective after publication in the gazette. 
Dictated &Corrected by me. 
.08.2025 
MANOJ KUMAR SINHA, Presiding Officer 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 


and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-!0054. GORAKHA NATH Digital signed by GORAKHA 
YADAVA Date: 2025.09.5 2:6:0 +05'30' 


