रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल" -(एन)04/0007/2003--24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Goh. -Sl. Wet. -37. -08082024-25693 
CG-DL-E-08082024-25693 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 6] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, अगस्त 8, 2024/श्रावण 7, 946 (शक) 
No. 6] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, AUGUST 8, 2024/SRAVANA I7, 946 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 8th August, 2024:— 


Bill No. 09 of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Wagqf Act, \995. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


43 of 995. 2. In section | of the Waqf Act, 995 (hereinafter referred to as the principal 
Act), in sub-section (/), for the word “Waqf”’, the words “Unified Waqf 
Management, Empowerment, Efficiency and Development” shall be substituted. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section l. 


Amendment of 
section 3. 


Insertion of new 
sections 3A, 3B 


and 3C. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


3. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 


(7) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(aa) “Aghakhani waqf’ means a waqf dedicated by an 
Aghakhani waqif;’; 


(ii) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 
‘(ca) “Bohra waqf” means a waqf dedicated by a Bohra wagqif;’; 
(iii) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(da) “Collector” includes the Collector of land-revenue of a 
district, or the Deputy Commissioner, or any officer not below the 
rank of Deputy Collector authorised in writing by the Collector;’; 


(iv) after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(fa) “Government Organisation” includes the Central 
Government, State Governments, Municipalities, Panchayats, 
attached and subordinate offices and autonomous bodies of the Central 
Government or State Government, or any organisation or Institution 
owned and controlled by the Central Government or State 
Government; 


(fb) “Government property” means movable or immovable 
property or any part thereof, belonging to a Government 
Organisation;’; 


(v) in clause (7), the words “, either verbally 07 shall be omitted; 
(vi) after clause (4), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ka) “portal and database” means the waqf asset management 
system or any other system set up by the Central Government for the 
registration, accounts, audit and any other detail of waqf and the 
Board, as may be prescribed by the Central Government;’; 


(vii) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(0 “prescribed”, means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act;’; 


(viii) clause (p) shall be omitted; 
(ix) in clause (r),— 


(a) in the opening portion, for the words “any person, of any 
movable or immovable property”, the words “any person practising 
Islam for at least five years, of any movable or immovable property, 
having ownership of such property,” shall be substituted; 


(b) sub-clause (7) shall be omitted; 


(c) in sub-clause (iv), after the word “welfare”, the words 
, maintenance of widow, divorced woman and orphan in such 
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government,” shall be 
inserted; 


(73 


(d) in the long line, for the words “any person”, the words “any 
such person” shall be substituted. 


4. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


“3A. (/) No person shall create a waqf unless he is the lawful owner Certain 
of the property and competent to transfer or dedicate such property. ao of 
waqf. 


(2) The creation of a waqf-alal-aulad shall not result in denial of 
inheritance rights of heirs, including women heirs, of the waqif. 


3B. (/) Every waqf registered under this Act, prior to the Filing of details 
commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2024, shall file the details eae 
of the waqf and the property dedicated to the waqf on the portal and aie 
database, within a period of six months from such commencement. 


(2) The details of the waqf under sub-section (/), amongst other 
information, shall include the following, namely:— 


(a) the identification and boundaries of waqf properties, their use 
and occupier; 


(6) the name and address of the creator of the waqf, mode and 
date of such creation; 


(c) the deed of waqf, if available; 
(d) the present mutawalli and its management; 
(e) the gross annual income from such waqf properties; 


(f) the amount of land revenue, cesses, rates and taxes annually 
payable in respect of the waqf properties; 


(g) an estimate of the expenses annually incurred in the 
realisation of the income of the waqf properties; 


(A) the amount set apart under the waqf for— 


(7) the salary of the mutawalli and allowances to the 
individuals; 


(ii) purely religious purposes; 
(iii) charitable purposes; and 
(iv) any other purposes; 
(7) details of court cases, if any, involving such waqf property; 


(7) any other particular as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


3C. (4) Any Government property identified or declared as waqf Wrongful 
property, before or after the commencement of this Act, shall not be deemed declaration of 
to be a waqf property. waqf. 


(2) If any question arises as to whether any such property is a 
Government property, the same shall be referred to the Collector having 
jurisdiction who shall make such inquiry as he deems fit, and determine 
whether such property is a Government property or not and submit his report 
to the State Government: 


Provided that such property shall not be treated as waqf property till 
the Collector submits his report. 


(3) In case the Collector determines the property to be a Government 
property, he shall make necessary corrections in revenue records and submit 
a report in this regard to the State Government. 


(4) The State Government shall, on receipt of the report of the 
Collector, direct the Board to make appropriate correction in the records.”. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Amendment of 


section 6. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


5. In section 4 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Survey of augaf.” 
shall be substituted; 


(0) for sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(/) Any survey of augaf pending before the Survey Commissioner, 
on the commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2024, shall be 
transferred to the Collector having jurisdiction and the Collector shall 
make the survey in accordance with the procedure in the revenue laws of 
the State, from the stage such survey is transferred to the Collector, and 
submit his report to the State Government.”; 


(c) sub-sections (/A), (2) and (3) shall be omitted; 


(d) in sub-section (4), in the opening portion, for the words “Survey 
Commissioner’, the word “Collector” shall be substituted; 


(e) in sub-section (5), after the words “Sunni waqf”’, the words “or 
Aghakhani waqf or Bohra waqf” shall be inserted; 


(f) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
6. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)”, 
the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (/)” shall be substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “Shia auqaf’, the words “or 
Aghakhani augaf or Bohra auqaf” shall be inserted; 


(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) The State Government shall upload the notified list of 
augaf on the portal and database within fifteen days from the date of 
its publication in the Official Gazette under sub-section (2). 


(2B) The details of each waqf shall contain the identification, 
boundaries of waqf properties, their use and occupier, details of the 
creator, mode and date of such creation, purpose of waqf, their present 
mutawallis and management in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.”; 


(d) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(3) The revenue authorities, before deciding mutation in the 
land records, in accordance with revenue laws in force, shall give a 
public notice of ninety days, in two daily newspapers circulating in the 
localities of such area of which one shall be in the regional language 
and give the affected persons an opportunity of being heard.”; 


(e) in sub-section (4), after the words “time to time”, the words “on 
the portal and database” shall be inserted. 


7. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) after the words “Sunni waqf’, the words “or Aghakhani waqf 
or Bohra waqf” shall be inserted; 


(ii) the words “and the decision of the Tribunal in respect of such 
matter shall be final” shall be omitted; 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(iii) in the first proviso, for the words “one year’, the words “two 
years” shall be substituted; 


(iv) the second proviso shall be omitted; 


(0) in sub-section (3), for the words “Survey Commissioner”, the word 
“Collector” shall be substituted. 


8. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/),— 


(i) after the words “Sunni waqf”, the words “or Aghakhani waqf or 
Bohra waqf” shall be inserted; 


(ii) the words “and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final” 
shall be omitted; 


(iii) in the first proviso, for the words “one year” wherever they occur, 
the words “two years” shall be substituted; 


(iv) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further that”, the 
following shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided further that an application may be entertained by the 
Tribunal after the period of two years specified in the first proviso, if 
the applicant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not 
making the application within such period: 


Provided also that”. 


9. In section 9 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following 
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) The Council shall consist of — 


(a) the Union Minister in charge of waqf—Chairperson, 
ex officio; 


(b) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the 
House of the people and one from the Council of States; 


(c) the following members to be appointed by the Central 
Government from amongst Muslims, namely:— 


(7) three persons to represent Muslim organisations having 
all India character and national importance; 


(ii) Chairpersons of three Boards by rotation; 


(iii) one person to represent the mutawallis of the waqf 
having a gross annual income of five lakh rupees and above; 


(iv) three persons who are eminent scholars in Muslim law; 


(d) two persons who have been Judges of the Supreme Court or 
a High Court; 

(e) one Advocate of national eminence; 

(f) four persons of national eminence, one each from the fields 


of administration or management, financial management, engineering 
or architecture and medicine; 


(g) Additional Secretary or Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India dealing with waqf matters in the Union Ministry or 
department—member, ex officio: 


Provided that two of the members appointed under clause (c) 
shall be women: 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Provided further that two members appointed under this sub-section 
shall be non-Muslim.”. 


Amendment of 0. In section 3 of the principal Act, for sub-section (24), the following 
section [3. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2A) The State Government may, if it deems necessary, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish a separate Board of Augqaf for 
Bohras and Aghakhanis.”. 


Amendment of Il. In section 4 of the principal Act,— 
section |4. 


(a) for sub-sections (J), (JA), (2), (3) and (4), the following 
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(/) The Board for a State and the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi shall consist of, not more than eleven members, to be nominated 
by the State Government,— 


(a) a Chairperson; 


(b) (7) one Member of Parliament from the State or, as the 
case may be, the National Capital Territory of Delhi; 


(7) one Member of the State Legislature; 


(c) the following members belonging to Muslim 
community, namely:— 


(7) one mutawalli of the waqf having an annual 
income of one lakh rupees and above; 


(7) one eminent scholar of Islamic theology; 


(iii) two or more elected members from the 
Municipalities or Panchayats: 


Provided that in case there is no Muslim member available 
from any of the categories in sub-clauses (7) to (iii), additional 
members from category in sub-clause (iii) may be nominated; 


(d) two persons who have professional experience in 
business management, social work, finance or revenue, 
agriculture and development activities; 


(e) one officer of the State Government, not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary to that State Government; 


(f) one Member of the Bar Council of the concerned State 
or Union territory: 


Provided that two members of the Board appointed under 
clause (c) shall be women: 


Provided further that two of total members of the Board 
appointed under this sub-section shall be non-Muslim: 


Provided also that the Board shall have at least one member each 
from Shia, Sunni and other backward classes among Muslim 
Communities: 


Provided also that one member each from Bohra and Aghakhani 
communities shall be nominated in the Board in case they have 
functional auqaf in the State or Union territory: 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


Provided also that the elected members of Board holding office 
on the commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2024 shall 
continue to hold office as such until the expiry of their term of office. 


(2) No Minister of the Central Government or, as the case may 
be, a State Government, shall be nominated as a member of the Board. 


(3) In case of a Union territory, the Board shall consist of not 
less than five and not more than seven members to be nominated by 
the Central Government under sub-section (/).”; 


(6) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(6) In determining the number of members belonging to Shia, 
Sunni, Bohra, Aghakhani or other backward classes among Muslim 
communities, the State Government or, as the case may be, the Central 
Government in case of a Union territory shall have regard to the 
number and value of Shia, Sunni, Bohra, Aghakhani and other 
backward classes among Muslim auqaf to be administered by the 
Board and appointment of the members shall be made, so far as may 
be, in accordance with such determination.”’; 


(c) sub-section (8) shall be omitted. 


2. In section 6 of the principal Act, for clause (d), the following clause 


shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(d) he has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to 
imprisonment for not less than two years;”. 


3. In section l7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after the words 


“shall meet’’, the words “at least once in every month” shall be inserted. 


4. Section 20A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
5. In section 23 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“() There shall be a full-time Chief Executive Officer of the Board to 
be appointed by the State Government and who shall be not below the rank 
of Joint Secretary to the State Government.”. 


6. In section 32 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), in clause (e), the Explanation and the proviso 
shall be omitted; 


(0) in sub-section (3), the words “and the decision of the Tribunal 
thereon shall be final” shall be omitted. 


7. In section 33 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, the words, brackets and figure 
“and the Tribunal shall have no power to make any order staying pending 
the disposal of the appeal, the operation of the order made by the Chief 
Executive Officer under sub-section (3)” shall be omitted; 


(5) sub-section (6) shall be omitted. 
8. In section 36 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“([A) On and from the commencement of the Waqf 
(Amendment) Act, 2024, no waqf shall be created without execution 
of a waqf deed.” 


Amendment of 
section l6. 


Amendment of 
section |7. 


Omission of 
section 20A. 


Amendment of 
section 23. 


Amendment of 
section 32. 


Amendment of 
section 33. 


Amendment of 
section 36. 


Amendment of 
section 37. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(b) in sub-section (3),— 


(7) in the opening portion, for the words “in such form and manner 
and at such place as the Board may by regulation provide”, the words 
“to the Board through the portal and database” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for clause (f), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(f) any other particulars as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government.”; 


(c) in sub-section (4), the words “or if no such deed has been executed 
or a copy thereof cannot be obtained, shall contain full particulars, as far as 
they are known to the applicant, of the origin, nature and objects of the 
waqf” shall be omitted; 


(d) for sub-section (7), the following sub-sections shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(7) On receipt of an application for registration, the Board shall 
forward the application to the Collector having jurisdiction to inquire 
the genuineness and validity of the application and correctness of any 
particulars therein and submit a report to the Board: 


Provided that if the application is made by any person other than 
the person administering the waqf, the Board shall, before registering 
the waqf, give notice of the application to the person administering the 
waaf and shall hear him if he desires to be heard. 


(7A) Where the Collector in his report mentions that the 
property, wholly or in part, is in dispute or is a Government property, 
the waqf in relation to such part of property shall not be registered, 
unless the dispute is decided by a competent court.”; 


(e) in sub-section (8), the proviso shall be omitted; 


(f) after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(9) The Board, on registering a waqf, shall issue the certificate 
of registration to the waqf through the portal and database. 


(J0) No suit, appeal or other legal proceeding for the 
enforcement of any right on behalf of any waqf which have not been 
registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be 
instituted or commenced or heard, tried or decided by any court after 
expiry of a period of six months from the commencement of the Waqf 
(Amendment) Act, 2024.”. 


9. In section 37 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) in the opening portion, after the word “particulars”, the words “in 
such manner as prescribed by the Central Government” shall be inserted; 


(7) in clause (7), for the words “provided by regulations”, the 
words “prescribed by the Central Government” shall be substituted; 


(0) in sub-section (3), after the words “land record office shall”, the 
words “before deciding mutation in the land records, in accordance with 
revenue laws in force, shall give a public notice of ninety days, in two 
daily newspapers circulating in the localities of such area of which one 
shall be in the regional language and give the affected persons an 
opportunity of being heard, then” shall be substituted. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


20. Section 40 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


2. In section 46 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 


(a) for the word “July”, at both the places where it occurs, the word 
“October” shall be substituted; 


(5) for the words “in such form and containing such particulars as may 
be provided by regulations by the Board of all moneys received”, the words 
“in such form and manner and containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, of all moneys received from any 
source” shall be substituted. 


22. In section 47 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(४) in clause (a),— 


(A) for the words “fifty thousand rupees”, the words “one 
lakh rupees” shall be substituted; 


(B) after the words “appointed by the Board”, the 
following shall be inserted, namely:— 


“from out of the panel of auditors prepared by the 
State Government: 


Provided that the State Government shall, while 
preparing such panel of auditors, specify the remuneration 
to be paid to such auditors;”; 


(ii) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(b) the accounts of the waqf having net annual income 
exceeding one lakh rupees shall be audited annually, by an 
auditor appointed by the Board from out of the panel of auditors 
as specified in clause (a);”; 


(iii) in clause (c), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that the Central Government may, by order, 
direct the audit of any waqf at any time by an auditor appointed 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, or by any 
officer designated by the Central Government for that purpose.”; 


(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2A) On receipt of the report under sub-section (2), the Board 
shall publish the audit report in such manner as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.”; 


(c) in sub-section (3), both the provisos shall be omitted. 
23. In section 48 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


Omission of 
section 40. 


Amendment of 
section 46. 


Amendment of 
section 47. 


Amendment of 
section 48. 


Insertion of new 
section S50A. 


Disqualification 
of mutawalli. 


Amendment of 
section 52. 


Amendment of 
section 52A. 


Amendment of 
section 55A. 


Amendment of 
section 6]. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


“(2A) The proceedings and orders of the Board under 
sub-section (/) shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government.”; 


(0) in sub-section (3), the words, brackets and figure “and the Tribunal 
shall not have any power to stay the operation of the order made by the 
Board under sub-section (/)” shall be omitted; 


(c) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 


24. After section 50 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“SOA. A person shall not be qualified for being appointed, or for 
continuing as, a mutawalli, if he— 


(a) is less than twenty-one years of age; 
(5) is found to be a person of unsound mind; 
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; 


(व) has been convicted of any offence and sentenced to 
imprisonment for not less than two years; 


(e) has been held guilty of encroachment on any waqf property; 
(f) has been on a previous occasion— 
(i) removed as a mutawalli; or 


(ii) removed by an order of a competent court or Tribunal 
from any position of trust either for mismanagement or for 
corruption.” 


25. In section 52 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), the words “and the 
decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


26. In section 52A of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) for the words “rigorous imprisonment”, the word 
“imprisonment” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in the provisio for the words “be vested in the Board”, the 
words “be reverted back to the waqf” shall be substituted; 


(0) sub-section (2) shall be omitted; 
(c) sub-section (4) shall be omitted. 


27. In section 55A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in the proviso, 
the words “and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final” shall be 
omitted. 


28. In section 6 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 
(7) clauses (e) and (f) shall be omitted; 


(ii) for the long line, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY ll 


“he shall, unless he satisfies the court or the Tribunal that there 
was reasonable cause for his failure, be punishable with a fine 
which shall not be less than twenty thousand rupees but which 
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.”; 


(6) after sub-section (/), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(IA) Ifa mutawalli fails to— 


(i) deliver possession of any waqf property, if ordered by 
the Board or the Tribunal; 


(ii) carry out the directions of the Collector or the Board; 


(iii) do any other act which he is lawfully required to do by 
or under this Act; 


(iv) provide statement of accounts under section 46; 
(v) upload the details of waqf under section 3B, 


he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months and also with a fine which shall not be less than twenty 
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.”. 


29. In section 64 of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) for clause (g), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(g) has failed, without reasonable excuse, to maintain 
regular accounts for one year or has failed to submit, within one 
year, the yearly statement of accounts, as required by section 46; 


2, 


or”; 


(ii) after clause (४0, the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(2) is a member of any association which has been 
declared unlawful under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
37 of 967. Act, |967.”; 


(b) in sub-section (4), the words “and the decision of the Tribunal on 
such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


30. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words “As 
soon as possible”, the words “Within six months” shall be substituted. 


3. In section 67 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(4) Any person aggrieved by the order made under sub-section (2) 
may, within sixty days from the date of the order, appeal to the Tribunal.”; 


(5) in sub-section (6), in the second proviso, the words “and the order 
made by the Tribunal in such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


32. In section 69 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (3), the second proviso shall be omitted; 


Amendment of 
section 64. 


Amendment of 
section 65. 


Amendment of 
section 67. 


Amendment of 
section 69. 


Amendment of 
section 72. 


Amendment of 
section 73. 


Amendment of 
section 83. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(6) in sub-section (4), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that no such order shall be made under this 
sub-section unless a written notice inviting objections from the person 
likely to be affected and general public, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the State Government.” 


33. In section 72 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “seven per cent.”, the words 
“five per cent.” shall be substituted; 


(0) in sub-section (7), the words “and the decision of the Board thereon 
shall be final” shall be omitted. 


34. In section 73 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), the words “and the 
decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final” shall be omitted. 


35. In section 83 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that any other Tribunal may, by notification, be 
declared as the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act.”; 


(6) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that if there is no Tribunal or the Tribunal is not 
functioning, any aggrieved person may appeal to the High Court 
directly.”; 


(c) for sub-section (4), the following shall be substituted, namely:— 
“(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of two members— 


(a) one person, who is or has been a District Judge, who 
shall be the Chairman; and 


(b) one person, who is or has been an officer equivalent in 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government—member: 


Provided that in case of absence of a member, Chairman of the 
bench may exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the 
Tribunal: 


Provided further that a Tribunal established under this Act, prior 
to the commencement of the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2024, shall 
continue to function as such until the expiry of the term of office of 
the Chairman and the members thereof under this Act.”; 


(d) in sub-section (4A), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“Provided that tenure of the Chairman and the member shall be 
five years from the date of appointment or until they attain the age of 
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier.”; 


(e) in sub-section (7), the words “final and” shall be omitted; 


(f) for sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(9) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Tribunal, may 
appeal to the High Court within a period of ninety days from the date 
of receipt of the order of the Tribunal.”. 


 0[894. 


30 of 20]3. 


| of 894. 


30 of 20]3. 


| of 894. 


30 of 20]3. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


36. In section 84 of the principal Act,— 


(a) after the words “decision in writing”, the words “within six months 
from the date of application” shall be inserted; 


(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 


“Provided that if the matter is not decided within six months, the 
Tribunal may decide the matter within a further period of six months 
for the reasons to be recorded in writing as to why the matter was not 
decided within the said period of six months.”. 


37. In section 9] of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(i) for the words and figures “the Land Acquisition Act, 894”, 
the words and figures “the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Act, 203” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “three months”, the words “one month” shall 
be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (3), for the words and figures “under section 3 or 
section 32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 894’’, the words and figures “under 
section 77 or section 78 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 203” shall be 
substituted; 


(c) in sub-section (4),— 


(i) for the words and figures “under section 3 or section 32 of 
the Land Acquisition Act, 894’, the words and figures “under section 
77 or section 78 of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency 
in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 203” shall 
be substituted; 


(ii) for the words “shall be declared void if the Board”, the words 
“shall be kept in abeyance relating to portion of the property claimed 
by the Board, if the Board” shall be substituted; 


(iii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Collector after hearing the parties 
concerned shall make the order within one month of the 
application of the Board.” 


38. In section l00 of the principal Act, for the words “Survey 
Commissioner’, the word “Collector” shall be substituted. 


39. In section 0] of the principal Act, in the marginal heading and in 
sub-section (/), for the words “Survey Commissioner” occurring at both the 
places, the word “Collector” shall be substituted. 


40. Section 04 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


4. Sections 07, 08 and l08A of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


42. After section l08A as so omitted of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“]068. (J) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


Amendment of 
section 84. 


Amendment of 
section 9]. 


Amendment of 
section l00. 


Amendment of 
section l0I. 


Omission of 
section 04. 


Omission of 
sections |07, 
08 and l08A. 


Insertion of new 
section l08B. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing powers, the Central Government may make rules for all or any of 
the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the waqf asset management system for the registration, 
accounts, audit and other details of waqf and Board under clause (ka), 
and the manner of payments for maintenance of widow, divorced 
woman and orphan under sub-clause (iv) of clause (r), of section 3; 


(6) any other particulars under clause (/) of sub-section (2) of 
section 3B; 


(c) the manner in which details of waqf to be uploaded under 
sub-section (2B) of section 5; 


(d) any other particulars under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of 
section 36; 


(e) the manner in which the Board shall maintain the register of 
auqaf under sub-section (/) of section 37; 


(f) such other particulars to be contained in the register of auqaf 
under clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 37; 


(g) form and manner and particulars of the statement of accounts 
under sub-section (2) of section 46; 


(A) the manner for publishing audit report under sub-section (2A) 
of section 47; 


(7) the manner of publication of proceedings and orders of Board 
under sub-section (2A) of section 48; 


(7) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall 
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be 
of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule.”. 

Amendment of 43. In section 09 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
section l09. 

(a) clause (ia) shall be omitted; 

(5) clause (iv) shall be omitted; 


(c) in clauses (via) and (vib), for the word and figures “section 3]7 at 
both the places where they occur, the word and figures “section 29” shall be 
substituted; 


(d) after clause (xviii), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(xviiia) the manner of giving notice inviting objections under 
proviso to sub-section (4) of section 69;”. 


Amendment of 44. In section 0 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), clauses (7) and (g) 
section 0. : 
shall be omitted. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Waqf Act, 995, was enacted to provide for the better administration of 
Augaf and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. However, during 
the course of implementation of the Act, it is felt that the Act has not proved 
effective in improving the administration of auqaf. 


2. Based on the recommendations of the High-Level Committee under the 
chairmanship of Justice (Retired) Rajinder Sachar and the Report of the Joint 
Parliamentary Committee on Waqf and Central Waqf Council and after having 
detailed consultation with other stakeholders, comprehensive amendments were 
made in the Act in the year 203. Despite the amendments, it has been observed 
that the Act still requires further improvement to effectively address issues related 
to the powers of the State Waqf Boards, registration and survey of waqf properties, 
removal of encroachments, including the definition of the “waqf’ itself. 


3. In view of the above, it has been felt necessary to amend the said Act with 
the aim to overcome the shortcomings and to enhance the efficiency of the 
administration and management of the waqf properties. Therefore, it is proposed 
to introduce in Parliament a Bill which seeks to address these issues 
comprehensively and achieve the intended objectives for effective management, 
empowerment, and development of waqf properties. The Bill, inter alia, provides 
for the followings, namely:— 


(a) renaming of the Waqf Act, 995 as the Unified Waqf 
Management, Empowerment, Efficiency and Development Act, 995; 


(b) clearly define “waqf’ as waqf by any person practicing Islam for 
at least five years and having ownership of such property; 


(c) ensuring that the creation of waqf-alal-aulad does not lead to the 
denial of inheritance rights to women; 


(व) omitting the provisions relating to the ““waqf by user’; 


(e) providing the functions of the Survey Commissioner to the 
Collector or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Collector duly 
nominated by the Collector for the survey of waqf properties; 


(f) providing for a broad based composition of the Central Waqf 
Council and the State Waqf Boards and ensuring the representation of 
Muslim women and non-Muslims; 


(g) providing for establishment of separate Board of Augaf for 
Boharas and Aghakhanis; 


(A) providing for representation of Shia, Sunni, Bohra, Agakhani and 
other backward classes among Muslim communities; 


(7) streamlining the manner of registration of waqfs through a central 
portal and database; 


(j) providing for a detailed procedure for mutation as per revenue 
laws with due notice to all concerned before recording any property as waqf 


property; 


6 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(k) omitting section 40 relating to the powers of Board to decide if a 
property is waqf property; 


(J) decreasing the annual contribution from seven per cent. to five per 
cent. payable to the Board by mutawalli of every waqf having the net 
annual income of not less than five thousand rupees; 


(m) providing for filing of accounts of waqf by mutawallis to the 
Board through a central portal for better control over their activities; 


(n) reforming the Tribunal structure with two members and providing 
for appeals against the orders of the Tribunal to the High Court within a 
specified period of ninety days; 


(0) omission of section 07 so as to make the Limitation Act, 963 
applicable to any action under the Act; and omission of sections 08 and 
l08A relating to special provision as to evacuee waqf properties and Act to 
have overriding effect. 


4. The notes on clauses explain the various provisions of the Bill. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI KIREN RIJIJU. 
The 6th August, 2024. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l7 


Notes on Clauses 


Clause | of the Bill seeks to provide for short title and commencement of 
the proposed legislation. 


Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section | relating to short title and 
commencement so as to amend the short title of the Act from “the Waqf Act, 
995”, to “the Unified Waqf Management, Empowerment, Efficiency and 
Development Act, 995”. 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 relating to definition so as to 
amend and substitute some definitions and provide new definitions in section 3, 
such as Aghakhani waqf, Bohra waqf, Collector, Government Organisation, 
Government property, etc. 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 3A, 3B and 3C relating to 
certain conditions of waqf, filing of details of wagf on portal and database; and 
wrongful declaration of waqf. It provides for certain conditions of waqf, filing of 
details of waqf on portal and database and prevention of wrongful declaration of 
waaf. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 4 relating to preliminary 
survey of waqf to replace the Collector in place of the Survey Officers, so as to 
confer powers upon the Collector to make the survey in accordance with the 
procedure in revenue laws of the State. 


Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 relating to publication of list 
of augaf so as to insert new sub-sections (2A) and (2B) to provide uploading of 
the notified list of auqaf on the portal and database within fifteen days. It further 
substitutes sub-section (3) which provides for making public notice of ninety days 
before deciding mutation of land records. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 6 relating to disputes regarding 
auqaf so as to insert the words “Aghakhani waqf or Bohra waqf” after the words 
“Sunni waqf”; and to omit that the expression “and the decision of the Tribunal in 
respect of such matter shall be final”. 


Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 relating to power of Tribunal 
to determine disputes regarding auqaf so as to include therein Aghakhani waqf or 
Bohra waqf; and to omit that the expression “and the decision of the Tribunal in 
respect of such matter shall be final’. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9 relating to establishment and 
constitution of Central Wagf Council so as to provide the composition 
broad-based by making provision for including two members from non-Muslim 
community. 


Clause 0 of the Bill seeks to amend section |3 relating to incorporation so 
as to provide the establishment of a separate Board of Augaf for Bohras and 
Aghakhanis if deemed necessary. 


Clause | of the Bill seeks to amend section 4 relating to composition of 
Board so as to make the composition of the State Waqf Board broad-based inter 
alia making provisions for two members from non-Muslim community. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Clause |2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 6 relating to disqualification 
for being appointed, or for continuing as, member of the Board so as to include 
the conviction of two years imprisonment and more for any offence as a ground 
for disqualification. 


Clause |3 of the Bill seeks to amend section |7 relating to meeting of Board 
so as to provide that the meeting of the Board to be held at least once in every 
month. 


Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to omit section 20A relating to removal of 
Chairperson by vote of no confidence. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend section 23 relating to appointment of Chief 
Executive Officer and his term of office and other conditions of service so as to 
provide the Chief Executive Officer is to be not below the rank of Joint Secretary to 
the State Government and omit the requirement of him being a Muslim. 


Clause l6 of the Bill seeks to amend section 32 relating to powers and 
function of the Board to omit Explanation and proviso to clause (e) in 
sub-section (2) to provide for giving of opportunity of being heard to the party 
affected; and to omit in sub-section (3) the expression “and the decision of the 
Tribunal in respect of such matter shall be final”. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 33 relating to powers of 
inspection by Chief Executive Officer or person authorised by him so as to omit 
in the words in the proviso in sub-section (4) of section 33 related to “and the 
Tribunal shall have no power to make any order staying pending the disposal of 
the appeal, the operation of the order made by the Chief Executive Officer under 
sub-section (3); and to omit sub-section (6). 


Clause |8 of the Bill seeks to amend section 36 relating to registration to 
provide that after the commencement of the proposed legislation, no waqf shall 
be created without execution of a waqf deed. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 37 relating to register of auqaf 
providing for the maintenance of register of auqaf by the Board in the prescribed 
manner. 


Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to omit section 40 related to “Decision if a 
property is waqf property”. 


Clause 2| of the Bill seeks to amend section 46 relating to submission of 
account of auqaf. 


Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to amend section 47 relating to audit of account 
of auqaf so as to substitute the expression “one lakh rupees” in place of “fifty 
thousand rupees”. 


Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend section 48 relating to Board to pass 
orders on auditors report to provide that the proceedings and orders of the Board 
shall be published in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 50A relating to 
“Disqualification of Mutawall7’”. 


Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to amend section 52 relating to recovery of waqf 
property transferred in contravention of section 5l so as to omit the words in 
sub-section (4) related to decision of Tribunal on such appeal shall be final. 


Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend section 52A relating to penalty for 
alienation of waqf property without sanction of Board provide for imprisonment 
instead of rigorous imprisonment; and to omit sub-sections (2) and (4) related to 
offence being cognizable and non-bailable . 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to amend section 55A relating to disposal of 
property left on waqf property by unauthorised occupants. 


Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to amend section 6] related to penalties 
inter alia to provide penalty to be twenty thousand rupees which may extend to 
one lakh rupees for certain failure by the mutawallis. 


Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend section 64 relating to removal of 
Mutawalli as so to provide that if without reasonable cause fails to maintain 
regular accounts for one year instead of two years or fail to submit within one year 
instead of in consecutive two years; and to provide further that the Mutawalli shall 
be removed if is a member of any association which has been declared unlawful 
under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 967; and also to omit the words 
that the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final. 


Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to amend section 65 relating to assumption of 
direct management of certain augaf by the Board for submitting report by the 
Board within a period of six months. 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 67 relating to supervision and 
supersession of committee of management to provide that aggrieved person may 
within sixty days of the order of the Board appeal to the Tribunal; and to omit the 
words relating of the finality of order made by the Tribunal. 


Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to amend section 69 related to power of Board 
to frame scheme for administration of waqf so as to omit sub-section (3) and insert 
a proviso in sub-section (4) that no such order shall be made under this sub-section 
unless a written notice inviting objections from the person likely to be affected 
and general public, in such manner as may be prescribed by the State Government. 


Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to section 72 relating to annual contribution payable 
to Board replacing the contribution to five per cent. in place of seven per cent. 


Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to amend section 73 related to power of Chief 
Executive Officer to direct banks or other person to make payments and to omit 
the expression “and the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final”. 


Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to amend section 83 relating to constitution of 
Tribunals, etc., so as to modify the composition of the Tribunal; and provide that 
if there is no Tribunal or the Tribunal is not functioning, any aggrieved person 
may appeal to the High Court directly; and to further provide that in absence of 
one member, the Chairman of the bench may exercise the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority of the Tribunal. It also provides that the Tribunals already existing prior 
to the commencement of proposed legislation shall continue to function till the 
expiry of the term of office. It also provides that the tenure of the Chairman and 
member to be for five years from the date of appointment or until the age of 
sixty-five years, whichever is earlier. It also provides the appeal to High Court 
within ninety days from the date of order of Tribunal. 


Clause 36 of the bill seeks to amend section 84 relating to Tribunal to hold 
proceedings expeditiously and to furnish to the parties copies of its decision. It 
provide that if the matter is not decided within six months, the Tribunal may 
decide the matter within a further period of six months for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing as to why the matter was not decided within the said period of 
six months. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to amend section 9] relating to proceedings under 
Land Acquisition Act | of 894 so as to substitute the reference of the Land 
Acquisition Act with the reference of “the Right to Fair Compensation and 
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 203”; 
and to substitute the period of “three months” with the period of “one month”. 


Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend section 00 relating to protection of 
action taken in good faith so as to include within its scope the Collector in place 
of Survey Commissioner. 


Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to amend section l0] relating to Survey 
Commission, members and officers of the Board deemed to be public servant so 
as to include within its scope the Collector in place of Survey Commissioner. 


Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to omit section 04 related to application of Act 
to properties given or donated by persons not professing Islam. 


Clause 4] of the Bill seeks to omit sections 07, 08 and 08A relating to 
Act 36 of 963 not to apply for recovery of waqf properties; special provision as 
to evacuee properties; Act to have overriding effect. 


Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert new section l08B relating to power of 
Central Government to make rules. 


Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to amend section 09 relating to power to make 
tules. 


Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to amend section |0 relating to powers to make 
regulations by the Board. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 220]. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill, if enacted, would not involve any financial expenditure either 
recurring or non-recurring from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 4] of the Bill seeks to insert a new section l08A which confers 
power upon the Central Government to make rules. The matters on which rules 
may be made, inter alia, relate to—(a) the waqf asset management system for the 
registration, accounts, audit and other details of waqf and Board under clause (ka), 
and the manner of payments for maintenance of widow, divorced woman and 
orphan under sub-clause (iv) of clause (7), of section 3; (0) any other particulars 
under clause (7) of sub-section (2) of section 3B; (c) the manner in which details 
of waqf to be uploaded under sub-section (24) of section 5; (व) any other 
particulars under clause () of sub-section (3) of section 36; (2) the manner in 
which the Board shall maintain the register of auqaf under sub-section (/) of 
section 37; (f) such other particulars to be contained in the register of auqaf under 
clause (f) of sub-section (/) of section 37; (g) form and manner and particulars of 
the statement of accounts under sub-section (2) of section 46; (॥) the manner for 
publishing audit report under sub-section (2A) of section 47; (7) the manner of 
publication of proceedings and orders of Board under sub-section (2A) of section 
48; and (7) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 


2. The rules made by the Central Government under section l08A of the 
Act, shall be laid as soon as they are made, before each House of Parliament. 


3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of 
procedure or administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


Bill No. 08 of 2024 


A Bill to repeal the Mussalman Walkf Act, |923. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


I. (/) This Act may be called the Mussalman Wakf (Repeal) Act, 2024. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 
2. (/) The Mussalman Wakf Act, 923 is hereby repealed. Repeal of Act 
42 of 923. 


(2) The repeal by this Act shall not affect the previous operation of the Act 
so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder, or any obligation or 
liability accrued or incurred under the Act so repealed, or any legal proceeding 
or remedy in respect of any such obligation or liability, as aforesaid, and any 
such legal proceeding or remedy may be continued or enforced as if this Act 
had not been passed. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY __ [Part II—Sec. 2] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Mussalman Wakf Act, 923, a colonial-era legislation, has become 
outdated and inadequate for effective management of waqf property in 
modern India. It is proposed to repeal the said Act to ensure uniformity, 
transparency, and accountability in administration and management of waqf 
properties through the Waqf Act, 995. This repeal will eliminate 
inconsistencies and ambiguities resulting from the continued existence of this 
redundant Act. 

2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; KIREN RIJIJU. 
The 6th August, 2024. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-I0054. 


Kshitiz pasha 
MGIPMRND—207GI($3)—8-8-2024. a. fe 


Mohan 22:42:20 +05'30! 


