रजिस्ट्री te डी० Uer—( TH) 04/0007/2003—26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Ot. Gh. -S7. Wet. -37.-27032026-27334 
CG-DL-E-27032026-27334 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 9] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, मार्च 25, 2026/चैत्र 4, 4948 (शक) 
No. 9] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, MARCH 25, 2026/CHAITRA 4, 948 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bill has been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 25th March 2026:— 


BILL No. XLI OF 2026 


A Bill to regulate the general rules governing the recruitment and conditions of service 
of Group A General Duty Officers and other officers in the Central Armed 
Police Forces and other rules regarding these forces, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS the Central Armed Police Forces are performing important 
functions of national security and are deployed for securing borders and maintaining 
internal security of the Union and the States and connected matters; 


AND WHEREAS the Central Armed Police Forces are primarily armed troops 
performing armed duties in the field with strict command and control mechanism 
and a functional hierarchy; 


AND WHEREAS the operational and functional requirements of the Central 
Armed Police Forces are distinct from other organisations; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Regulation of 
recruitment and 
conditions of 
service. 


AND WHEREAS the recruitment and conditions of service of Group A General 
Duty Officers and other officers and members of the Central Armed Police Forces 
are governed by the rules made under the respective Acts specified in the First 
Schedule; 


AND WHEREAS the Central Armed Police Forces perform functions of national 
security in close coordination with State authorities; 


AND WHEREAS in the interest of maintaining Centre-State relationship and 
ensuring close coordination between the Union and the States, the Indian Police 
Service Officers are necessary for effective functioning of these forces; 


AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to enact an umbrella law to regulate 
the recruitment and conditions of service of Group A General Duty Officers and 
other officers appointed to the Central Armed Police Forces and other rules 
regarding these forces, with a view to ensuring legislative clarity, preserving its 
operational distinctiveness, and harmonising judicial directions with administrative 
and federal requirements. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (J) This Act may be called the Central Armed Police Forces (General 
Administration) Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. (Z) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Central Armed Police Force” means an armed force of the Union 
constituted under any of the Acts specified in the First Schedule; 


(0) “Central Government” means the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 
Government of India; 


(c) “Group A General Duty Officer” means Group A (general duty or 
executive) officer of the rank of Assistant Commandant and above in the 
Central Armed Police Force; 


(व) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette and the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed 
accordingly; 


(e) “officer” means Group A General Duty Officer and includes— 
(i) an officer of the Indian Police Service on deputation; or 


(ii) an officer of the Indian Army on deputation or 
re-employment; or 


(iii) such other officers recruited under the rules specified in the 
Second Schedule, 


in the Central Armed Police Force; 


(f) “Order” means any instruction issued by any department of the 
Government of India whether called as Office Memorandum or by any 
other name. 


(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Acts specified in the First Schedule shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in those Acts. 


3. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, or in— 


(a) any judgment, decree or order of any court; or 


(b) any Order issued from time to time, 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


the Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the method, 
manner and mode of recruitment including promotion and deputation and the 
conditions of service of officers in the Central Armed Police Force: 


Provided that the rules regulating the recruitment of Group A General Duty 
Officers as specified in the Second Schedule, shall continue to be in force unless 
and until they are modified, amended, rescinded or superseded, keeping in view the 
functional and operational requirements of the Central Armed Police Force: 


Provided further that for the purposes of appointment of officers from the 
Indian Police Service in the ranks of Inspector General and above, such rules shall 
provide for— 


(a) fifty per cent. of the posts to be filled by deputation in the rank of 
Inspector General; and 


(6) a minimum of sixty-seven per cent. of the posts to be filled by 
deputation in the rank of Additional Director General: 


Provided also that the posts in the ranks of Special Director General and 
Director General shall be filled by deputation only. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification, make such other rules for 
the Central Armed Police Forces for achieving the objectives of this Act. 


(3) In case of any inconsistency between any rule made under this Act with 
any other rule or Order, whether made or issued before or after the commencement 
of this Act, the rules made under this Act shall prevail. 


4. (/) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary 
or expedient in the public interest so to do, by notification,— 


(a) add any other Act governing a new armed force of the Union or any 
existing armed force of the Union in the First Schedule, or alter or amend the 
said Schedule; or 


(b) add a new rule in the Second Schedule or alter or amend the said 
Schedule, 


and thereupon, the First Schedule or the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be 
amended accordingly. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


5. Any financial benefits granted to Group A General Duty Officers under any 
Order issued before the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to be so 
granted till such time new Orders are issued in this regard. 


6. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session 
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice 
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any 
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 


Power to amend 
Schedules. 


Savings. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Provisions of 
Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Power to remove 8. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 

neuer Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 
years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(/)(a), 2(2) and 4(/)] 


Sl. No. Central Armed Police Force Acts 


The Central Reserve Police Force Act, 949 (66 of 949). 
The Border Security Force Act, 968 (47 of 968). 

The Central Industrial Security Force Act, 968 (50 of 968). 
The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Act, 992 (35 of 992). 

The Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007 (53 of 2007). 


Poe ee oe 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See sections 2(e)(iii), 3(/) and 4(/)] 


Sl. No. Name of the rules 


l. (i) The Central Reserve Police Force Group “A” (General Duty) 
Officers Recruitment Rules, 200. 


2. (i) The Border Security Force Group ‘A’ (General Duty Officers) 
Recruitment Rules, 207. 


(ii) The Border Security Force Group ‘A’ (General Duty Officers) 
Recruitment Rules, 205. 


3. (i) The Central Industrial Security Force, Assistant Commandant 
(Executive), Recruitment Rules, 2009. 


(ii) The Central Industrial Security Force (Group ‘A’ Executive 
Cadre Recruitment Rules, 2002). 


(iii) The Central Industrial Security Force, Group ‘A’ posts 
(Executive Cadre) Recruitment Rules, 200. 


(iv) The Central Industrial Security Force, Additional Director 
General, Recruitment Rules, 2020. 


(v) The Central Industrial Security Force, Director General, 
Recruitment Rules, 2003. 


4. (i) The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, General Duty Cadre 
(Group ‘A’ Posts) Recruitment Rules, 208. 


(ii) The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Additional Director 
General (General Duty) Recruitment Rules, 2020. 


5. (i) The Sashastra Seema Bal Group ‘A’ Combatised (General Duty) 
Director General, Additional Director General, Inspector General, 
Deputy Inspector General and Commandant Posts Recruitment 
Rules, 203. 


(ii) The Sashastra Seema Bal Group ‘A’ Combatised (General Duty) 
Second-in-Command, Deputy Commandant and_ Assistant 
Commandant Posts Recruitment Rules, 202. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Central Armed Police Forces play a vital role in maintaining national 
security and discharging important functions such as securing the borders of the 
country, undertaking anti-insurgency operations and maintaining internal security 
of the Union and the States and matters connected therewith. These Forces are also 
designed to supplement Armed Forces of the Union during war. 


2. The Central Armed Police Forces primarily comprise ground troops who 
perform armed duties in the field. Owing to the nature of armed duties performed 
by these Forces, they are required to have strict command and control mechanism 
and functional hierarchy. Accordingly, they are structured as 
Sections/Platoons/Companies/Battalions and higher field formations. Having 
regard to the requirement of their operational command structure, the organisational 
framework of the Central Armed Police Forces differs from that of other 
organisations. 


3. Under article 32 of the Constitution, the Indian Police Service is an All 
India Service, and the officers of the Service are posted in the Union and the States. 
Historically, Indian Police Service officers are an integral and important part of the 
Central Armed Police Forces, who have been serving on deputation along with 
officers and members of these Forces. The Central Armed Police Forces perform 
functions relating to national security and anti-insurgency in close coordination with 
the State authorities. Therefore, in the interest of maintaining Centre-State relations 
by ensuring close coordination between the Union and the States for effective 
operational functioning, it is essential to maintain the existing system of deputation 
of the Indian Police Service Officers in the Central Armed Police Forces. 


4. The Central Armed Police Forces are governed by the respective Acts of 
the Parliament. The recruitment and conditions of service of Group A General Duty 
Officers and other officers and members in the Central Armed Police Forces are 
governed by the rules made under these Acts. 


5. In view of expanding functional and operational requirements, the distinct 
organisational structure of these Forces have evolved over a period of time. In recent 
years, due to absence of an umbrella law, regulatory provisions have evolved in a 
fragmented manner resulting in several litigations on service-related matters, 
leading to some functional and administrative difficulties. Considering the nature 
and purposes of the Central Armed Police Forces and to avoid unnecessary 
litigations, there is a need to lay down an umbrella law to regulate the recruitment, 
deputation, promotion and other conditions of services of Group A General Duty 
Officers and other officers appointed in these Central Armed Police Forces and other 
rules regarding these Forces, to ensure legislative clarity, preserving their distinct 
operational and functional requirements and harmonising judicial directions with 
administrative and federal requirements. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; AMIT SHAH. 
The \6th March, 2026. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the proposed legislation do not involve any expenditure, 
either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 6 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules 
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which such rules 
may be made relate to the method, manner and mode of recruitment including 
promotion and deputation and the conditions of service of officers in the Central 
Armed Police Force under sub-clause (/) of clause 3 and such other rules for the 
Central Armed Police Forces under sub-clause (2) of clause 3. 


2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


P.C. MODY, 
Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ by ksuimz 
MOHAN 
MOHAN ®te:2026.03.27 


78:50:20 +05'30' 


MGIPMRND—695GI(S4)—27-03-2026. 


