रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल०--(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


OA. -7. Wet. -37.-022025-26834 
CG-DL-E-022025-26834 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


a 8] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, दिसम्बर i, 2025/अग्रहायण 7, 947 (शक) 
No. 8] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, DECEMBER I, 2025/AGRAHAYANA 7, 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on lst December, 2025:— 


BILL No. |40 oF 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 207. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


. (/) This Act may be called the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second 
Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 5, 7 to 3 and 5 shall 
come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 


section 2. 


Amendment of 
section |2. 


Amendment of 
section |3. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


2. In the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 207 (hereinafter referred to 


as the principal Act), in section 2,— 


(a) in clause (6/), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words, 
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of 
section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 20l7” shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the 
Ist day of April, 2025; 


(b) in clause (69),— 


(i) in sub-clause (2), for the words “management of a municipal or 
local fund;”’, the words “management of a local fund or municipal fund.” 
shall be substituted; 


(ii) after sub-clause (c), the following Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause,— 


(a) “local fund” means any fund under the control or 
management of an authority of a local self-government 
established for discharging civic functions in relation to a 
Panchayat area and vested by law with the powers to levy, 
collect and appropriate any tax, duty, toll, cess or fee, by 
whatever name called; 


(5) “municipal fund” means any fund under the control 
or management of an authority of a local self-government 
established for discharging civic functions in relation to a 
Metropolitan area or Municipal area and vested by law with 
the powers to levy, collect and appropriate any tax, duty, toll, 
cess or fee, by whatever name called;’; 


(c) after clause (//6), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(/764) “unique identification marking” means the unique 
identification marking referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 
section l48A and includes a digital stamp, digital mark or any other 
similar marking, which is unique, secure and non-removable;’. 

3. In section 2 of the principal Act,— 
(a) sub-section (4) shall be omitted; 


(6) in sub-section (5), for the words, brackets and figures 
, sub-section (3) or sub-section (4),” the words, brackets and figure 
“or sub-section (3)” shall be substituted. 


(73 


4. In section |3 of the principal Act,— 
(a) sub-section (4) shall be omitted; 


(6) in sub-section (5), for the words, brackets and figures 
, sub-section (3) or sub-section (4),” the words, brackets and figure 
“or sub-section (3)” shall be substituted. 


(73 


5. In section |7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (d),— 


(a) for the words “plant or machinery”, the words “plant and machinery” 
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect 
from the Ist day of July, 207; 


(b) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation | thereof, and 
after Explanation | as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


Manipur Act 3 
of 207. 


3 of 207. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


‘Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clause (d), it is hereby 
clarified that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal, or other authority, any 
reference to “plant or machinery” shall be construed and shall always be 
deemed to have been construed as a reference to “plant and machinery’;’ 


ड़ 


6. In section 20 of the principal Act, with effect from the Ist day of 
April, 2025,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words, 

brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of 

3 of 207. section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 20l7” shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted; 


(5) in sub-section (2), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words, 

brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of 

I3 of 207. section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 207,” shall be 
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted. 


7. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely: — 


“Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be 
permitted, if the— 


(i) input tax credit as is attributable to such a credit note, if availed, 
has not been reversed by the recipient, where such recipient is a 
registered person; or 


(ii) incidence of tax on such supply has been passed on to any other 
person, in other cases.” 


8. In section 38 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the words “an auto-generated statement’, the 
words “‘a statement” shall be substituted; 


(5) in sub-section (2),— 


(i) for the words “auto-generated statement under’, the words 
“statement referred in” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (a), the word “and” shall be omitted; 


(iii) in clause (6), after the words “by the recipient,”, the word 
“including” shall be inserted; 


(iv) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(c) such other details, as may be prescribed.”. 


9. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words “and 
within such time”, the words “within such time, and subject to such conditions and 
restrictions” shall be substituted. 


0. In section 07 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), for the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely: — 


“Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving 
demand of any tax, no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum equal to 
ten per cent. of the said penalty has been paid by the appellant.”. 


Amendment of 
section 20. 


Amendment of 
section 34. 


Amendment of 
section 38. 


Amendment of 
section 39. 


Amendment of 
section 07. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Insertion of new 
section |22B. 


Penalty for 
failure to comply 
with track and 
trace 
mechanism. 


Insertion of new 
section l48A. 


Track and trace 
mechanism for 
certain goods. 


Amendment of 
Schedule III. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


l. In section l2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving 
demand of any tax, no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum 
equal to ten per cent. of the said penalty, in addition to the amount payable 
under the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 07 has been paid by the 
appellant.”. 


2. After section 22A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“{22B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any 
person referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section l48A acts in 
contravention of the provisions of the said section, he shall, in addition to any 
penalty under Chapter XV or the provisions of this Chapter, be liable to pay a 
penalty equal to an amount of one lakh rupees or ten per cent. of the tax 
payable on such goods, whichever is higher.”. 


3. After section 48 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“_[4803., (7) The Government may, on the recommendations of the 
Council, by notification, specify— 


(a) the goods; 


(b) persons or class of persons who are in possession or deal with 
such goods, 


to which the provisions of this section shall apply. 


(2) The Government may, in respect of the goods referred to in 
clause (a) of sub-section (/),— 


(a) provide a system for enabling affixation of unique 
identification marking and for electronic storage and access of 
information contained therein, through such persons, as may be 
prescribed; and 


(b) prescribe the unique identification marking for such goods, 
including the information to be recorded therein. 


(3) The persons referred to in sub-section (/) shall— 


(a) affix on the said goods or packages thereof, a unique 
identification marking, containing such information and in such manner; 


(b) furnish such information and details within such time and 
maintain such records or documents, in such form and manner; 


(c) furnish details of the machinery installed in the place of 
business of manufacture of such goods, including the identification, 
capacity, duration of operation and such other details or information, 
within such time and in such form and manner; 


(व) pay such amount in relation to the system referred to in 
sub-section (2), 


as may be prescribed.”. 


4. In Schedule III to the principal Act, with effect from the Ist day of 
July, 20!7,— 


(7) in paragraph 8, after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted 
and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


“(aa) supply of goods warehoused in a Special Economic Zone or 
in a Free Trade Warehousing Zone to any person before clearance for 
exports or to the Domestic Tariff Area;”; 


(ii) in Explanation 2, after the words “For the purposes of’, the words, 
brackets and letter “clause (a) of” shall be inserted and shall be deemed to 
have been inserted; 


(iii) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted and 
shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:— 


‘Explanation 3—For the purposes of clause (aa), the expressions 

“Special Economic Zone”, “Free Trade Warehousing Zone” and 

“Domestic Tariff Area” shall have the same meanings as respectively 

28 of 2005. assigned to them in section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.’. 


5. No refund shall be made of all such tax which has been collected, but 
which would not have been so collected, had section 4 been in force at all material 
times. 


6. (J) The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) 
Ord. 2 of 2025. Ordinance, 2025 is hereby repealed. 


(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the 
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act. 


No refund of tax 
collected. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 20l7 was enacted pursuant to 
enactment of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 207 to make provision for 


levy and collection of tax on intra-State supply of goods or services or both by the 
State of Manipur and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


2. The provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 20l7 were 
amended through sections 2] to 34 of the Finance Act, 2025 and similar 
amendments were required to be carried out in the Manipur Goods and Services Tax 
Act, 207 at the earliest, as per the decision of the 56th GST Council, to avoid 
repugnancy with the said Central Act. 


3. Since the proclamation issued by the President under article 356 of the 
Constitution is in force in the State of Manipur since the l3th February, 2025 and 
as Parliament was not in session and circumstances existed which rendered it 
necessary to take immediate action to have continuance of the Manipur Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 207 in line with the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 207, 
the President promulgated the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second 
Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 on the 7th October, 2025. 


4. The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance, 
2025 is to be replaced by an Act of Parliament and for the said purpose, it is 
proposed to introduce the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) 
Bill, 2025 in Parliament. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 27th November, 2025. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 207. The 
Bill, if enacted, will not involve any expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring 
nature from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 38 of the 
Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act to empower the Government to provide by 
rules other details to be made available in the statement. 


2. Clause |3 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section l48A in the Manipur 
Goods and Services Tax Act, relating to track and trace mechanism for certain 
goods. Sub-section (2) of the said section |48A seeks to empower the Government 
to provide by rules a system for enabling affixation of unique identification marking 
and for electronic storage and access of information and the person through whom 
such system may be provided. It further seeks to empower the Government to 
provide by rules the unique identification marking for goods including the 
information to be recorded therein. 


3. Sub-section (3) of the said section 48A seeks to empower the Government 
to provide by rules, the information to be contained in, and the manner of affixing 
on the goods and packages a unique identification marking under clause (a), the 
form and manner and the time for furnishing information and details and 
maintaining records or documents under clause (0), the time within which and the 
form and manner in which other details shall be furnished under clause (c) and the 
amount to be paid under clause (d) of the said sub-section. 


4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made or 
notifications or order may be issued in accordance with the provisions of the Bill 
are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal 
character. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


BILt No. |43 oF 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Central Excise Act, |944. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
. (/) This Act may be called the Central Excise (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 
Amendment of 2. In the Central Excise Act, 944, in the Fourth Schedule, in Section IV, for 
Fourth Schedule. the Table occurring under the sub-heading “Supplementary Notes”, the following 

Table shall be substituted, namely:— 
‘Tariff item Description of goods Unit Rate of duty 
() (2) (3) (4) 
240] Unmanufactured Tobacco; Tobacco Refuse 
240I 0 - Tobacco, not stemmed or stripped: 
240.!0!0 --- Flue cured virginia tobacco kg. 70% 
240020 --- Sun cured country (natu) tobacco kg. 70% 
240030 --- Suncured virginia tobacco kg. 70% 
240l040 --- Burley tobacco kg. 70% 
240l050 --- Tobacco for manufacture of biris, kg. 70% 
not stemmed 
240l060 --- Tobacco for manufacture of kg. 70% 
chewing tobacco 
240!.!070 --- Tobacco for manufacture of cigar kg. 70% 
and cheroot 
240l080 --- Tobacco for manufacture ofhookah kg. 70% 
tobacco 
240.!090 --- Other kg. 70% 
240 20 - Tobacco, partly or wholly stemmed or stripped: 
240l200 --- Flue cured virginia tobacco kg. 70% 
240 2020 ---  Suncured country (natu) tobacco kg. 70% 
240! 2030 ---  Suncured virginia tobacco kg. 70% 
240! 2040 --- Burley tobacco kg. 70% 
240] 2050 --- Tobacco for manufacture of biris kg. 70% 
240 2060 --- Tobacco for manufacture of kg. 70% 
chewing tobacco 
240! 2070 --- Tobacco for manufacture of cigar kg. 70% 
and cheroot 
240] 2080 --- Tobacco for manufacture of kg. 70% 
hookah tobacco 
240 2090 --- Other kg. 70% 
240l 3000 - Tobacco refuse kg. 60% 
2402 Cigars, cheroots, cigarillos and cigarettes, of tobacco or of 
tobacco substitutes 
2402 0 - Cigars, cheroots and cigarillos, containing tobacco: 
2402 0!0 --- Cigar and cheroots Tu 25% or 
Rs. 5000 per 
thousand 


whichever is 
higher 


l of 944. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY l] 
(l) (2) (3) (4) 
2402 020 ---  Cigarillos Tu 25% or 
Rs. 5000 per 
thousand 
whichever is 
higher 
2402 20 - Cigarettes, containing tobacco: 
2402 20!0 --- Other than filter cigarettes, oflength Tu Rs. 2700 per 
not exceeding 65 millimetres thousand 
2402 2020 --- Other than filter cigarettes, oflength Tu 75. 4500 per 
exceeding 65 millimetres but not thousand 
exceeding 70 millimetres 
24022030 ---  Filtercigarettes oflength(including Tu Rs. 3000 per 
the length of the filter, the length of thousand 
filter being ll millimetres or its 
actual length, whichever is more) 
not exceeding 65 millimetres 
24022040 --- Filter cigarettes oflength(including Tu Rs. 5200 per 
the length of the filter, the length of thousand 
filter being l! millimetres or its 
actual length, whichever is more) 
exceeding 65 millimetres but not 
exceeding 70 millimetres 
24022050 ---  Filtercigarettesoflength(including Tu Rs. 7000 per 
the length of the filter, the length of thousand 
filter being l! millimetres or its 
actual length, whichever is more) 
exceeding 70 millimetres but not 
exceeding 75 millimetres 
24022090 --- Other Tu Rs. 000 
per 
thousand 
2402 90 - Other: 
2402900 --- Cigarettes of tobacco substitutes Tu — Rs. 5000 per 
thousand 
24029020 8 --- Cigarillos of tobacco substitutes Tu 4% or 
Rs. 5000 per 
thousand 
whichever is 
higher 
24029090 = --- Other Tu 4% or 
Rs. 5000 per 
thousand 


whichever is 
higher 


i2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 
() (2) (3) (4) 
2403 Other manufactured tobacco and manufactured tobacco 

substitutes; “Homogenised” or “Reconstituted” tobacco; 
Tobacco extracts and essences 
- Smoking tobacco, whether or not containing tobacco 
substitute in any proportion; 
2403 |] -- Water pipe tobacco specified in Sub-heading Note to this 
Chapter: 
2403 l0  --- Hookah or gudaku tobacco kg. 40% 
2403 l90_ --- Other kg. 40% 
2403 9 -- Other: 
2403 [9 [0 --- Smoking mixtures for pipes and kg. 325% 
cigarettes 
--- Biris: 
2403 [9 2[ ---- Other than paper rolled biris, Tu 0% 
manufactured without the aid of 
machine 
2403 929  =---- Other Tu l0% 
2403 990_— --- Other kg. 22% 
- Other: 
2403 9 00. -- “Homogenised” or “reconstituted” —_ kg. 70% 
tobacco 
2403 99 -- Other: 
2403 990— --- Chewing tobacco kg. 00% 
2403 99 20. --- Preparations containing chewing kg. 00% 
tobacco 
2403 99 30 --- Jarda scented tobacco kg. 00% 
2403 99 40. --- Snuff kg. 70% 
2403 99 50 --- Preparations containing snuff kg. 70% 
2403 99 60. --- Tobacco extracts and essence kg. 70% 
2403 99 70. --- Cut-tobacco kg. 0% 
2403 99 90. --- Other kg. 25% 
2404 Products containing tobacco, reconstituted tobacco, nicotine, 


or tobacco or nicotine substitutes, intended for inhalation 
without combustion; other nicotine containing products 
intended for the intake of nicotine into the human body 


- Products intended for inhalation without combustion 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 
6) (2) (3) (4) 
2404l00 -- Containing tobacco or reconstituted kg. 00% 
tobacco 
2404200 -- Other, containing nicotine kg. 
2404900 -- Other kg. l00% 
- Other: 
24049l00 -- For oral application kg. 
24049200 -- For transdermal application kg. 
24049900 -- Other kg. 7 


l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

With the introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST) on Ist July, 207, 
the Central Excise Act, 944 was repealed by section |74 of the Central Goods and 
Services Tax Act, 207, except in respect of goods listed under Entry 84 of List I of 
the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. This includes tobacco and tobacco 
products. With the levy of GST and compensation cess on tobacco and tobacco 
products, the rates of Central Excise duties were reduced significantly to allow for 
the levy of compensation cess without large impact on their tax incidence. 


2. Compensation cess levied on tobacco and tobacco products, wherever 
applicable, will be discontinued once interest payment obligations and loan 
liabilities under the compensation cess account are completely discharged. In order 
to give the Government, the fiscal space to increase the rate of central excise duty 
on tobacco and tobacco products so as to protect tax incidence, it is imperative to 
amend the table in Section IV of the Fourth Schedule to the said Act. 


3. Accordingly, it is proposed to introduce the Central Excise (Amendment) 
Bill, 2025 in Parliament to substitute the table containing the tariff rates of tobacco 
and tobacco products in Section IV of the Fourth Schedule to the Central Excise 
Act, 944. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 28th November, 2025. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY I5 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any expenditure, either recurring or 
non-recurring in nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


BILL No. |42 oF 2025 


A Bill to augment the resources for meeting expenditure on national security and for 
public health, and to levy a cess for the said purposes on the machines 
installed or other processes undertaken by which specified goods are 
manufactured or produced and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


. (/) This Act may be called the Health Security se National Security Cess Short title and 
Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “adjudicating authority’ means the concerned proper officer 
appointed or authorised under the respective provisions to pass orders under 
this Act after adjudication, but does not include the Board, the revisional 
authority and the appellate authority; 


(6) “appellate authority” means an authority appointed or authorised to 
hear appeals under section 29; 


(c) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Customs, Excise and Service Tax 
Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 29 of the Customs Act, 962; 


(d) “Board” means the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs 
constituted under section 3 of the Central Boards of Revenue Act, 963; 


(e) “cess” means the Health Security se National Security Cess levied 
under section 4; 


(f) “factory” means any premises, including the precincts thereof, 
wherein or in any part of which— 


(i) the specified goods are manufactured; or 


(ii) any manufacturing process connected with the production of 
the specified goods are being carried on or is ordinarily carried on; 


(g) “machine” for the purposes of manufacture or production of the 
specified goods includes all types of Form, Fill and Seal Machines and Profile 
Pouch Making Machines, by whatever name called, whether vertical or 
horizontal, with or without collar, single track or multi-track, and any other 
type of packing machine used for packing of the specified goods in pouches, 
tins or other containers; 


(A) “manufacture” includes— 


(i) any process incidental or ancillary to the completion of the 
specified goods; and 


(ii) the process of packing or repacking of such goods in a pouch 
or tin or other container or labelling or re-labelling thereof including the 
declaration or alteration of retail sale price on it or adoption of any 
other treatment on the goods to render the specified goods marketable to 
the consumer, 


whether or not such process is the only process undertaken; 


(i) “notification” means a notification published in the Gazette of India 
and the expression “notify” with its grammatical variation and cognate 
expressions shall be construed accordingly; 


(j) “pan masala” means goods falling under tariff item 2069020 of the 
First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 975; 


(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(J) “proper officer” means any officer of the Central Government 
entrusted with such powers or assigned with specific functions under the 
provisions of this Act by the Board; 


(m) “process” means any manual, mechanical, electrical, electronic, 
automated or hybrid operation, or any other activity by which the specified 
goods are manufactured or produced, whether wholly or in part; 


(n) “revisional authority” means an authority appointed or authorised 
under section 28 for revision of an order of the adjudicating authority; 


52 of 962. 


54 of 963. 


5] of 975. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


(०) “Schedule” means a Schedule annexed to this Act; 


(p) “specified goods” means the goods as specified in Schedule I to this 
Act or such other goods as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify; 


(4) “State” includes a Union territory with Legislature; 
(r) “taxable person” shall mean a person referred to in section 3; and 


(s) “weight” means the maximum weight of the specified goods that is 
capable of being packaged in each pouch, tin or other container by the relevant 
machine or process. 


CHAPTER II 
TAXABLE PERSON 


3. (/) For the purposes of this Act, “taxable person” means any person who 
owns, possesses, operates, manages, or is otherwise in control of the machine or 
undertakes any process by which specified goods are manufactured or produced, 
whether directly or through job-workers, employees, hired labour, or through any 
other person acting on his behalf under any arrangement. 


(2) A person shall be treated as a taxable person under this section irrespective 
of whether he has opted for, or is availing of, any composition scheme, concessional 
levy, or any other alternate scheme of taxation applicable to the specified goods, 
under any law for the time being in force. 


(3) For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) the ownership, possession, or control over the machine or processes 
shall be sufficient to constitute a person as a taxable person, irrespective of the 
actual quantity manufactured; 


(b) where a machine or process, is owned, possessed, leased, hired or 
otherwise placed at the disposal of one or more persons manufacturing or 
producing the specified goods, every such person shall be regarded as a 
taxable person; and 


(c) where the production or manufacture of the specified goods are 
divided into stages or processes carried out by different persons, such person 
undertaking the final process that results in the completion or rendering of the 
specified goods marketable, shall be deemed to be the taxable person. 


CHAPTER III 
HEALTH SECURITY SE NATIONAL SECURITY CESS 
4. (/) There shall be levied and collected a cess, to be called Health Security 
se National Security Cess, from every taxable person, on the machines installed or 
other processes undertaken by him for the manufacture or production of the 


specified goods referred to in Schedule I, at the amount specified in Schedule II and 
computed in the manner provided in section 5. 


(2) The cess leviable under sub-section (/) shall be in addition to any other duties 
or taxes chargeable on the specified goods under any law for the time being in force. 


(3) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public 
interest so to do, it may, by notification, exempt any taxable person or a class of 
taxable persons, unconditionally or subject to such conditions, from the whole or 
any part of the cess leviable under this section for such period as may be specified 
in the said notification. 


Taxable person. 


Levy and 
collection of 
cess. 


Manner of 
computation of 
cess. 


Power of 
Central 
Government to 
increase amount 
of cess in 
special 
circumstances. 


Purpose of levy 
of cess. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


5. (/) The cess referred to in section 4 shall be computed in accordance with 
the provisions of this section based on the relevant process, speed of the machine or 
capacity of other processes and the weight of the specified goods packed in pouch, 
tin or other container, as the case may be, as declared by the taxable person and, 
where applicable, as verified or calibrated by the proper officer under section 9, and 
on the amount specified in Schedule II for such combination of process, speed or 
capacity and weight. 


(2) Where the specified goods are manufactured or produced wholly or partly with 
the aid of a machine, the cess shall be levied and collected from the taxable person— 


(a) with reference to the maximum rated speed of the machine measured 
in number of pouches, tins or containers per minute; 


(6) for the corresponding weight of the specified goods packed in a 
pouch, tin or container; 


(2) at the monthly amount of cess specified in column (4) in Table | of 
Schedule II against such rated speed and weight provided therein. 


(3) The cess payable under section 4 shall be the aggregate of cess calculated 
under sub-section (2) for each of the machines installed in a factory of the taxable 
person and where such taxable person owns, possesses, leases or otherwise controls 
machines installed in more than one factory, the cess shall be computed separately 
for each such factory. 


(4) Where the specified goods are manufactured or produced by a taxable person 
wholly by manual process without the aid of a machine, the cess shall be levied and 
collected from the taxable person for each factory at the monthly amount specified in 
column (4) in Table 2 of Schedule II, irrespective of the capacity of such manual process 
or the weight of the specified goods packed in a pouch, tin or container. 


(5) For the purposes of sub-section (4), a taxable person shall be deemed to be 
engaged in the manufacture or production of the specified goods wholly by manual 
process without the aid of a machine only where no machine capable of performing, 
assisting, or completing any part of the process of manufacture or production of the 
specified goods is installed in the factory of the taxable person. 


(6) The cess determined under sub-section (2) or sub-section (4) shall be 
payable for each month or part thereof and shall be subject to such abatement or 
other conditions, as may be prescribed. 


(7) Where any machine or manual process unit remains inoperative for a 
continuous period of fifteen days or more, the cess computed under this section 
shall, subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed, be abated proportionately 
for the period of such non-operation. 


6. (J) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the 
public interest so to do, it may, by notification, direct in respect of such specified 
goods that the amount of cess specified in column (4) in Table | of Schedule II and 
in column (4) in Table 2 of the said Schedule, shall be increased to such amount, 
not exceeding twice the amount so specified, for such period as may be specified in 
the notification. 


(2) The provisions of this Act shall apply to the cess, as increased under this 
section, as they apply to the cess specified in Schedule II. 


7. (/) The cess shall be levied for the purposes of meeting expenditure on the 
national security of India and for public health. 


(2) The proceeds of the cess levied under section 4 shall first be credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India and the Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, utilise such sums of money of the cess for 
the purposes specified in sub-section (/), as it may consider necessary. 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(3) For the purposes of utilisation of the cess, the Central Government may 
specify such activities, schemes and programmes for national security or, as the case 
may be, for public health, as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
REGISTRATION AND RETURNS 


8. (/) Every taxable person who owns, possesses, leases or otherwise controls 
a machine installed or a process undertaken in a factory, shall register himself with 
the jurisdictional proper officer in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The proper officer may, either on his own motion or on an application filed 
by the registered person, or by his legal heirs in case of death of such person, cancel 
the registration, in such manner and within such period, as may be prescribed, 
having regard to the circumstances where,— 


(a) the business has been discontinued, or transferred fully for any 
reason including death of the proprietor, or amalgamated with other legal 
entity, or demerged, or otherwise disposed of; or 


(b) there is any change in the constitution of the business; or 
(c) the taxable person is no longer liable to be registered under this section. 


(3) The proper officer may, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard, 
cancel the registration of a taxable person from such date, as he may deem fit, where,— 


(a) a registered person has contravened any of the provisions specified 
in section 8; or 


(b) a registered person has not furnished returns for six consecutive 
calendar months; or 


(c) registration has been obtained by means of fraud, wilful 
misstatement or suppression of facts. 


(4) The cancellation of registration under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) 
shall not affect the liability of the person to pay cess and other dues under this Act 
or to discharge any other obligation under this Act or the rules made thereunder, for 
any period prior to the date of such cancellation, whether or not such cess and other 
dues are determined before or after the date of the cancellation. 


(5) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any taxable person, whose 
registration is cancelled by the proper officer on his own motion, may apply to such 
officer for revocation of cancellation of the registration in such form and manner, 
as may be prescribed, within a period of thirty days from the date of service of the 
cancellation order and upon receiving such application, the proper officer may, in 
such manner and within such period, as may be prescribed, and after giving a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order, either revoke the cancellation of 
registration or reject the application. 


9. (/) Every taxable person shall, in respect of machine installed or process 
undertaken in such factory, furnish a self-declaration in such form, manner and 
within such time, as may be prescribed, containing the particulars of the machines 
installed or processes undertaken for the manufacture or production of the specified 
goods, together with the parameters relevant for computation of the cess, including 
the maximum rated speed, weight of packing, nature of packing and such other 
technical or operational particulars, as may be prescribed. 


(2) Where any parameter relevant for the computation of the cess undergoes 
any change, the taxable person shall furnish a fresh self-declaration under 
sub-section (/) within such time, form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


Registration, 
cancellation and 
revocation. 


Declaration to be 
filed by taxable 
person. 


Payment of cess 
and returns. 


Scrutiny and 
assessments. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 2. 


(3) In case of installation, addition or commencement of operation of any 
machine or process, the taxable person shall furnish the self-declaration referred to in 
sub-section (2) within fifteen days of such installation, addition or commencement. 


(4) The declaration in sub-section (/) shall be subject to calibration, 
verification and confirmation by the proper officer, with the approval of an officer 
not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, in such form, manner and within such 
time, as may be prescribed and the parameters so verified and confirmed shall be 
considered for the computation of cess under section 5. 


(5) No calibration, verification or confirmation under sub-section (4) shall be 
made by the proper officer without giving the taxable person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


(6) Every taxable person shall comply with such oversight, monitoring or 
verification mechanisms, whether technological, operational or audit-based, as may 
be prescribed, to ensure the integrity and accuracy of reporting in relation to the 
manufacture or production of the specified goods. 


0. (/) The cess levied under section 4 shall be collected from every taxable 
person at the beginning of each month, but not later than the 7th day of that month, 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every taxable person shall, for every calendar month or part thereof, 
self-assess the cess payable under section 4 and furnish a return, in such form, 
manner, within such time, and subject to such conditions and restrictions, as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Board may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification, 
extend the time limit for furnishing the returns under this section for such class of 
taxable persons as may be specified therein. 


(4) Where any taxable person, after furnishing a return under sub-section (2), 
discovers any omission or incorrect particulars therein, other than as a result of any 
action in this behalf by the proper officer, he shall rectify such omission or incorrect 
particulars in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, subject to payment of 
interest, if any, under this Act. 


(5) Where a taxable person fails to furnish a return under sub-section (2), a 
notice shall be issued by the proper officer requiring him to furnish such return 
within fifteen days in such form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(6) No taxable person shall furnish a return for any calendar month after the 
expiry of a period of two years from the due date for furnishing such return. 


CHAPTER V 
AUDIT AND ASSESSMENT 


l. (J) The proper officer may scrutinise the return and related particulars 
furnished by the registered taxable person to verify the correctness of the return and 
inform him of the discrepancies noticed, if any, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed, and seek his explanation thereto and in case— 


(a) the explanation so given is found acceptable, the taxable person shall 
be informed accordingly and no further action shall be taken in this regard; 


(b) no satisfactory explanation is furnished within a period of thirty days 
of being informed by the proper officer or such further period, as may be 
permitted by him, or where the taxable person, after accepting the 
discrepancies, fails to take the corrective measure in his return for the month 
in which the discrepancy is accepted, the proper officer may initiate 
appropriate action in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


5 of 908. 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Where a taxable person fails to furnish the return under section 0, either 
on his own motion or in response to a notice issued, the proper officer may proceed 
to assess the liability of cess of the said person to the best of his judgement, taking 
into account all the relevant material which is available or which he has gathered 
and issue an assessment order within a period of five years from the end of the month 
to which the cess not paid relates. 


(3) Where a taxable person fails to obtain registration, or whose registration 
has been cancelled but who was liable to pay cess, the proper officer may proceed 
to assess the liability of the cess payable by such taxable person to the best of his 
judgment for the relevant calendar month and issue an assessment order within a 
period of five years from the end of the month to which the cess not paid relates. 


(4) No assessment order shall be passed under sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3) by the proper officer without giving the taxable person a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard. 


2. (/) The proper officer not below the rank of a Commissioner or any other 
officer authorised by him may, by way of a general or special order, undertake audit 
of any registered taxable person for such period, at such frequency and in such 
manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The officers referred to in sub-section (/) may conduct audit in their office 
or at the place of business of the registered taxable person. 


(3) The registered taxable person shall be informed by way of a notice not less 
than fifteen working days prior to the conduct of audit in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The audit under sub-section (/) shall be completed within a period of three 
months from the date of commencement of such audit. 


(5) Where the proper officer referred to in sub-section (/) is satisfied that the 
audit in respect of such registered taxable person cannot be completed within the 
period of three months, he may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the 
said period by a further period not exceeding six months. 


(6) For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression, “commencement of 
audit” shall mean the date on which the records and other documents called for by 
the proper officer, are made available by the registered taxable person or the actual 
institution of audit at the office of the proper officer or at the place of business of 
such registered taxable person, whichever is later. 


(7) During the course of audit, the proper officer may require the registered 
taxable person— 


(a) to afford him the necessary facility to verify the books of account or 
other documents as he may require; and 


(b) to furnish such information as he may require and render necessary 
assistance for timely completion of the audit. 


(8) On conclusion of audit, the proper officer shall, within thirty days, inform 
the registered taxable person, whose records are audited, about the findings, his 
rights and obligations and the reasons for such findings. 


(9) Where the audit conducted under sub-section (/) results in detection of 
cess not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, the proper officer may initiate 
action under section 6. 


3. (/) The proper officer under this Act shall have power to summon any person 
whose attendance he considers necessary, either to give evidence or to produce a 
document or any other thing, in any inquiry in the same manner, as provided in the 
case of a Civil Court under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 908. 


Audit. 


Power to 
summon persons 
to give evidence 
and produce 
documents. 


Access to 
business 
premises. 


Officers to assist 
proper officers. 


Determination of 
cess not paid or 
short paid or 
erroneously 
refunded. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


(2) Every such inquiry referred to in sub-section (/) shall be deemed to be a 
“Judicial proceeding” within the meaning of section 93 and section 267 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


4. (J) Any officer under this Act, authorised by the proper officer not below 
the rank of a Joint Commissioner, shall have access to any place of business of a 
taxable person to inspect books of account, documents, computers, computer 
programs, computer software, whether installed in a computer or otherwise, and 
such other things as he may require and which may be available at such place, for 
the purposes of carrying out any audit, scrutiny, verification and checks, as may be 
necessary to safeguard the interest of revenue. 


(2) Every person in charge of the place referred to in sub-section (/) shall, on 
demand, make available to the officer authorised under sub-section (/), or the audit 
party deputed by the proper officer,— 


(a) such records as prepared or maintained by the taxable person and 
declared to the proper officer in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(5) trial balance or its equivalent; 
(c) statements of annual financial accounts, duly audited, wherever required; 
(d) cost audit report, if any, under section 48 of the Companies Act, 203; 


(e) the income-tax audit report, if any, under section 44AB of the 
Income-tax Act, 96]; and 


(f) any other relevant record, for the scrutiny by such officer or audit 
party, within a period not exceeding fifteen working days from the day when 
such demand is made, or such further period as may be allowed by the said 
officer or the audit party. 


5. (/) All officers of police, railways, customs and those officers engaged in 
the collection of land revenue, including village officers, officers of the State 
Governments and Union territory Administrations shall assist the proper officer in 
the implementation of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification, empower and require any 
other class of officers to assist the proper officers in the implementation of this Act 
when called upon to do so. 


6. (/) Where it appears to the proper officer that any cess has not been paid 
or short paid or erroneously refunded, he shall serve notice on the taxable person 
chargeable with cess which has not been so paid or which has been so short paid or 
to whom the refund has erroneously been made due to any lapse on the part of the 
taxable person, requiring him to show cause as to why he should not pay the amount 
specified in the notice along with interest payable thereon under section |7 and a 
penalty leviable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


(2) No notice under sub-section (/) shall be issued, if the cess which has not 
been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded in a financial year is less than one 
thousand rupees. 


(3) The proper officer shall issue the notice under sub-section (/) within a 
period of twenty-four months from the due date for furnishing of return for the 
month to which the cess not paid or short paid relates to or within a period of 
twenty-four months from the date of erroneous refund. 


(4) Where a notice has been issued for any calendar month under 
sub-section (/), the proper officer may serve a statement, containing the details of 
cess not paid or short paid or erroneously refunded for such periods other than those 
covered under the said sub-section, on the taxable person chargeable with cess. 


45 of 2023. 


8 of 20]3. 


43 of 96l. 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(5) The service of the statement referred to in sub-section (4) shall be deemed 
to be the service of notice on the taxable person under sub-section (/), subject to the 
condition that the grounds relied upon for such month other than those covered 
under sub-section (/) are the same as are mentioned in the earlier notice. 


(6) In case of the cess which has not been paid or short paid or erroneously 
refunded, the penalty— 


(a) for any reason, other than the reason of fraud or any wilful 
misstatement or suppression of facts to evade tax, shall be equivalent to ten 
per cent. of the cess due from such taxable person or ten thousand rupees, 
whichever is higher; 


(b) for the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of 
facts to evade cess, shall be equivalent to the cess due from such person. 


(7) The proper officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made 
by the taxable person chargeable with cess, determine the amount of cess, interest 
and penalty due from such person and issue an order within a period of twelve 
months from the date of issuance of notice specified in sub-section (4). 


(8) Where the proper officer referred to in sub-section (7) is not able to issue the 
order within the period specified in the said sub-section, another proper officer, not 
below the rank of Commissioner or an officer, not below the rank of a Joint 
Commissioner, authorised by him, may, having regard to the reasons to be recorded in 
writing for delay in issuance of the order under the said sub-section before the expiry of 
the specified period, extend the said period for a further period not exceeding six months. 


(9) Where any cess has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded, 
other than the reason of fraud or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to 
evade cess, the taxable person chargeable with cess may,— 


(a) before service of notice under sub-section (/), pay the amount of cess 
along with interest payable under section 7 of such cess on the basis of his own 
ascertainment of such cess or the cess as ascertained by the proper officer and 
inform the proper officer in writing of such payment, who shall, on receipt of 
such information, not serve any notice under sub-section (/) or the statement 
under sub-section (4), as the case may be, in respect of the cess so paid or any 
penalty payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; 


(b) pay the said cess along with interest payable under section 7 within 
a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of show cause notice by him, 
and on doing so, no penalty shall be payable and all proceedings in respect of 
the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded. 


(J0) Where any cess has not been paid or short paid or erroneously refunded 
by reason of fraud, or any wilful misstatement or suppression of facts to evade cess, 
the taxable person chargeable with cess, may,— 


(a) before service of notice under sub-section (/), pay the amount of cess 
along with interest payable under section l7 and a penalty equivalent to fifteen 
per cent. of such cess on the basis of his own ascertainment of such cess, or the 
cess as ascertained by the proper officer, and inform the proper officer in writing 
of such payment and the proper officer, on receipt of such information, shall not 
serve any notice under the said sub-section, in respect of the cess so paid or any 
penalty payable under the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; 


(b) pay the said cess along with interest payable under section l7 and a 
penalty equivalent to twenty-five per cent. of such cess within a period of sixty 
days from the date of receipt of the notice, and on doing so, all proceedings in 
respect of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded; 


Interest payable 
on delay in 
payment of 
cess. 


Penalty for 
certain 
contraventions. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(c) pay the cess along with interest payable thereon under section 7 and 
a penalty equivalent to fifty per cent. of such cess within a period of sixty days 
of the date of receipt of the order, and on doing so, all proceedings in respect 
of the said notice shall be deemed to be concluded. 


(//) Where the proper officer is of the opinion that the amount paid under 
clause (a) of sub-section (9) or clause (a) of sub-section (/0) falls short of the amount 
actually payable, he shall proceed to issue the notice as provided for in sub-section (/) 
in respect of such amount which falls short of the amount actually payable. 


(/2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (a) or clause (0) of 
sub-section (9), the penalty under clause (a) of sub-section (6) shall be payable, 
where any amount of self-assessed tax or any amount collected as cess has not been 
paid within a period of thirty days from the due date of payment of such cess. 


7. (J) Every person who is liable to pay cess in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, but fails to pay the cess or any 
part thereof to the Central Government within the specified period, shall, for the 
period for which the cess or any part thereof remains unpaid, pay on his own, interest 
at the rate of fifteen per cent. per annum. 


(2) The interest under sub-section (/) shall be calculated, in such manner as may 
be prescribed, from the day succeeding the day on which such tax was due to be paid. 


CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
8. (/) Where a taxable person who— 
(a) Owns, operates or in control of any machine or process for the 


purpose of manufacture or production of the specified goods without declaring 
to the proper officer under this Act; or 


(b) fails to pay the cess levied under section 4 beyond a period of three 
months from the date on which such payment becomes due under section 0; or 


(c) fails to furnish returns as required under section 0 or falsifies or 
substitutes financial records or produces fake accounts or documents or 
furnishes any false information or declaration or return with an intention to 
evade payment of cess due under the said section; or 


(d) fraudulently obtains refund of cess; or 


(e) obstructs or prevents any officer in discharge of his duties under this 
Act; or 


(f) is liable to be registered under this Act but fails to obtain 
registration; or 


(g) fails to furnish information or documents called for by an officer in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, or furnishes 
false information or documents during any proceedings under this Act; or 


(A) tampers with, or destroys any material evidence or document; or 


(i) disposes of or tampers with any goods that have been seized under 
this Act, 


the proper officer may, after making such inquiry as he deems fit, impose on such 
taxable person in addition to the cess leviable, a penalty of ten thousand rupees or 
an amount equivalent to the cess payable or cess sought to be evaded, or the refund 
claimed fraudulently, whichever is higher. 


46 of 2023. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) Any person who aids or abets any of the contraventions specified in 
clauses (a) to (i) of sub-section (/) shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to 
one hundred thousand rupees. 


(3) Any order imposing any such penalty shall be passed by the proper officer 
only after giving the taxable person a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


9. (/) Whoever commits or causes to commit and retains any benefit arising 
out of contraventions specified in clause (a) or clause (9) or clause (2) or clause (d) 
of sub-section (/) of section 8 shall be punishable in cases where the amount of 
cess evaded or the amount of refund wrongly taken— 


(a) exceeds five hundred lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years or with fine, or with both; or 


(6) exceeds two hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed five hundred 
lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine, or with both; or 


(c) exceeds one hundred lakh rupees but does not exceed two hundred 
lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or 
with fine, or with both. 


(2) Whoever commits or causes to commit and retains any benefit arising out of 
contraventions specified in clause (f) or clause (7) of sub-section (/) of section 8, or 
abets the commission of an offence specified in the said sub-section, shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine, or with both. 


(3) Whoever, convicted for an offence under this section is again convicted 
for an offence under this section, he shall be punishable for the second and for every 
subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
with fine, or with both. 


(4) The Court may, for special and adequate reasons to be recorded in the 
judgment, sentence any person to imprisonment under sub-section (/) or 
sub-section (3), for a term less than six months. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, all offences under this Act, except the offences referred to in 
sub-section (6) shall be non-cognizable and bailable. 


(6) The offences specified in clause (a) or clause (8) or clause (2) or clause (d) 
of sub-section (/) of section I8 shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


(7) No person shall be prosecuted for any offence under this section except with 
the previous sanction of the proper officer, not below the rank of Commissioner. 


20. (7) Where an offence committed by a person under this Act is a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as 
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has 
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence 
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


(3) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a taxable person 
being a partnership firm or a limited liability partnership or a Hindu undivided family 
or a trust, the partner or karta or managing trustee shall be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly and the 
provisions of sub-section (2) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to such persons. 


Punishment for 
certain 
contraventions. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Cognizance of 
offences. 


Presumption of 
culpable mental 
state. 


Compounding 
of offences. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


(4) Nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this section,— 


(a) company means a body corporate and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(0) director, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


2. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder except with the previous sanction of the proper officer, 
not below the rank of Commissioner, and no court inferior to that of a Magistrate of 
the first class, shall try any such offence. 


22. In any prosecution for an offence under this Act which requires a culpable 
mental state on the part of the accused, the Court shall presume the existence of such 
mental state but it shall be a defence for the accused to prove the fact that he had no 
such mental state with respect to the act charged as an offence in that prosecution. 


Explanation—F or the purposes of this section,— 


(a) the expression “culpable mental state” includes intention, motive, 
knowledge of a fact, and belief in, or reason to believe, a fact; 


(b) a fact is said to be proved only when the court believes it to exist 
beyond reasonable doubt and not merely when its existence is established by 
a preponderance of probability. 


23. (/) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023, any offence under this Act, not being an offence punishable with 
imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after 
the institution of prosecution, be compounded by a proper officer, not below the rank of 
Commissioner, on payment, by the person accused of the offence, to the Central 
Government of such compounding amount in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The option of compounding shall not be available to a person— 


(a) who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any of the 
offences specified in clauses (a) to (f) of sub-section (/) of section 8 and the 
offences which are relatable to the said specified offences; 


(b) who has been allowed to compound once in respect of any offence, other 
than those in clause (a), under this Act, the cess exceeding one crore rupees; 


(c) a person who has been accused of committing an offence under this 
Act which is also an offence under any other law for the time being in force; 


(d) a person who has been convicted for an offence under this Act by a 
Court; and 
(e) any other class of persons or offences, as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any compounding shall be allowed only after making payment of cess, 
interest and penalty involved in such offences and shall not affect the proceedings, 
if any, instituted under any other law for the time being in force. 


(4) The amount for compounding of offences under this section shall be such, 
as may be prescribed, subject to the minimum amount not being less than ten 
thousand rupees or fifty per cent. of the cess involved, whichever is higher, and the 
maximum amount not being less than thirty thousand rupees or one hundred and 
fifty per cent. of the cess, whichever is higher. 


(5) On payment of such compounding amount as may be determined by the 
proper officer, no further proceedings shall be initiated under this Act against the 
accused person in respect of the same offence and any criminal proceedings, if 
already initiated in respect of the said offence, shall stand abated. 


46 of 2023. 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


CHAPTER VII 
INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE 


24. (/) Where the proper officer, not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, 
has reasons to believe that any taxable person is manufacturing or producing the 
specified goods without complying with the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, he may authorise, in writing, any officer not below the rank of Assistant 
Commissioner subordinate to him to inspect any places of business of the taxable 
person or warehouse or godown, where the specified goods so manufactured or 
produced are stored. 


(2) Where the proper officer referred to in sub-section (/), either pursuant to 
an inspection carried out under sub-section (/) or otherwise, has reasons to believe 
that the specified goods or machines liable to confiscation or any documents or 
books or things, which in his opinion, shall be useful for or relevant to any 
proceedings under this Act, are secreted in any place, he may authorise, in writing, 
any other proper officer to search and seize, or may himself search and seize such 
goods, machines, documents or books or things. 


(3) Where it is not practicable to seize any such goods or machine, the proper 
officer, or any officer authorised by him, may serve on the owner or the custodian 
of such goods an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with 
such goods except with the previous permission of such officer. 


(4) The documents or books or things so seized shall be retained by such 
officer only for so long as may be necessary for their examination and for any 
inquiry or proceedings under this Act. 


(5) The documents, books or things referred to in sub-section (2) or any other 
documents, books or things produced by a taxable person or any other person, which 
have not been relied upon for the issue of notice under this Act or the rules made 
thereunder, shall be returned to such person within a period not exceeding thirty 
days of the issue of the said notice. 


(6) The officer authorised under sub-section (2) shall have the power to seal 
or break open the door of any factory or to break open any almirah, electronic 
device, box, receptacle in which the specified goods, accounts, registers or 
documents of the person are suspected to be concealed, where access to such factory, 
almirah, electronic devices, box or receptacle is denied. 


(7) The person from whose custody any documents are seized under 
sub-section (2) shall be entitled to make copies thereof or take extracts therefrom in 
the presence of an authorised officer at such place and time as such officer may 
indicate in this behalf except where making such copies or taking such extracts may, 
in the opinion of the proper officer, prejudicially affect the investigation. 


(8) The goods or machines so seized under sub-section (2) shall be released, 
on a provisional basis, upon execution of a bond and furnishing of a security, in such 
manner and of such quantum, respectively, as may be prescribed, or on payment of 
applicable cess, interest and penalty payable, as the case may be. 


(9) Where any goods or machines are seized under sub-section (2) and no 
notice in respect thereof is given within six months of the seizure of such goods, 
such goods shall be returned to the person from whose possession they were seized. 


(४09) The period of six months specified in sub-section (7) may, on sufficient 
cause being shown, be extended by the proper officer for a further period not 
exceeding six months. 


Power of 
inspection, 
search and 
seizure. 


Confiscation of 
specified goods 
or machines. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


(//) The proper officer may, with the prior permission of the Board, having 
regard to the perishable nature of the specified goods, depreciation in its value or 
machines with the passage of time, constraints of storage space for such goods or 
machines or any other relevant considerations, may, as soon as may be after its 
seizure under sub-section (2), dispose of such goods or machines in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(22) Where the specified goods or machines, being items specified under 
sub-section (//), have been seized by a proper officer, or any officer authorised by 
him under sub-section (2), he shall prepare an inventory of such goods or machines 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(/3) The provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, relating 
to search and seizure, shall, so far as may be, apply to search and seizure under this 
section subject to the modification that sub-section (5) of section 85 of the said 
Sanhita shall have effect as if for the word “Magistrate”, wherever it occurs, the 
word “Commissioner” were substituted. 


(4) Where the proper officer has reasons to believe that any person has 
evaded or is attempting to evade the payment of any cess, he may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, seize the accounts, registers or documents of such person 
produced before him and shall grant a receipt for the same, and shall retain the same 
for so long as may be necessary in connection with any proceedings under this Act 
or the rules made thereunder for prosecution. 


25. (/) Where any taxable person— 


(a) owns, operates or controls any machine installed or undertakes any 
process for the manufacture or production of the specified goods in 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder 
with intent to evade payment of cess; or 


(b) contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made 
thereunder with intent to evade payment of cess; or 


then, all such goods or machines shall be liable to confiscation and the person shall 
be liable to penalty under section 8. 


(2) Whenever confiscation of any such goods or machines are authorised by 
this Act, the officer adjudging it shall give to the owner of such goods or machines 
an option to pay in lieu of confiscation, such penalty as specified under 
sub-section (3) as the said officer thinks fit. 


(3) The penalty leviable under sub-section (2) shall not exceed the market 
value of the specified goods or the machines confiscated, less the cess chargeable 
thereon. 


(4) The aggregate of penalty under sub-section (2) and penalty leviable shall 
not be less than the penalty equal to two hundred per cent. of the cess payable on 
such goods. 


(5) No order for confiscation of the specified goods or machines for imposition 
of penalty shall be issued without giving the person a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard. 


(6) Where the specified goods or machines are confiscated under this Act, the 
title of such goods or machines shall thereupon vest in the Central Government. 


(7) The proper officer who confiscates any goods or machine under this 
section shall take and hold possession of the things confiscated and every officer of 
police, on the requisition of such proper officer, shall assist him in taking and 
holding such possession. 


46 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(8) The proper officer may, after satisfying himself that the confiscated goods 
or machines are not required in any other proceedings under this Act and after giving 
reasonable time not exceeding a period of three months to pay the fine in lieu of 
such confiscation, dispose of such goods or conveyance and deposit the sale 
proceeds thereof with the Central Government. 


26. (/) Where a proper officer, not below the rank of Commissioner, has 
reasons to believe that a person has committed any offence specified in clause (a) 
or clause (b) or clause (c) or clause (व) of sub-section (/) of section 8 which is 
punishable under the said sub-section or sub-section (3) of the said section, he may, 
by order, authorise any other proper officer below him to arrest such person. 


(2) Where a person is arrested under sub-section (/) for an offence specified 
under sub-section (5) of section 9, the officer authorised to arrest the person shall 
inform such person of the grounds of arrest and produce him before a Magistrate 
within twenty-four hours. 


(3) Subject to the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023,— 


(a) where a person is arrested under sub-section (/) for any offence 
specified under sub-section (5) of section 9, he shall be admitted to bail or in 
default of bail, be forwarded to the custody of the Magistrate; 


(b) in the case of a non-cognizable and bailable offence, the proper 
officer not below the rank of Assistant Commissioner shall, for the purpose of 
releasing an arrested person on bail or otherwise, have the same powers and 
be subject to the same provisions as an officer-in-charge of a police station. 


27. (/) Any amount due under this Act (including any interest or penalty) from 
any taxable person may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land 
revenue. 


(2) All officers of police, central tax and customs and all officers of the Central 
Government and the State Government engaged in the collection of land revenue, 
and all village officers are hereby empowered and required to assist the proper 
officer in the execution of this Act. 


CHAPTER VIII 
REVISION AND APPEALS 


28. (J) The revisional authority, not below the rank of a Commissioner, 
authorised in this behalf, by an order of the Board, may, on his own motion, or upon 
information received by him, call for and examine the record of any proceedings, 
and if he considers that any order passed under this Act by any officer subordinate 
to him is erroneous in so far as it is prejudicial to the interest of revenue, or is illegal 
or improper, or has not taken into account certain material facts, whether available 
at the time of issuance of the said order or not, or in consequence of an observation 
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, he may, if necessary, stay the 
operation of such order for such period as he deems fit and after giving the person 
concerned an opportunity of being heard and after making such further inquiry as 
may be necessary, pass such order, as he thinks just and proper, including enhancing 
or modifying or annulling the said order. 


(2) The revisional authority shall not exercise any power under 
sub-section (/), if— 


(a) the order has been subject to an appeal under section 29 or 
section 30; or 


Power to arrest. 


Recovery of 
amount due and 
assistance of 
officers. 


Revision. 


Appeals to 
appellate 
authority. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3] 


(b) the period specified under sub-section (/) of section 29 has not yet 
expired or more than two years have expired after the passing of the order 
sought to be revised; or 


(c) the order has already been taken up for revision under this section at 
an earlier stage; or 


(d) the order was passed in exercise of the powers under sub-section (/). 


(3) The revisional authority may pass an order under sub-section (/) on any 
point which has not been raised and decided in an appeal referred to in clause (a) of 
sub-section (2), before the expiry of a period of one year from the date of the order 
in such appeal or before the expiry of a period of two years referred to in clause (8) 
of that sub-section, whichever is later. 


(4) Every order passed in a revision under sub-section (/) shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 30 or section 32 or section 33, be final and binding on the 
parties. 


(5) If the order subject to revision under sub-section (/) involves an issue on 
which the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court has given its decision in some other 
proceedings and an appeal to the High Court or the Supreme Court against such 
decision of the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court is pending, the period spent 
between the date of the decision of the Appellate Tribunal and the date of the 
decision of the High Court, or the date of the decision of the High Court and the 
date of the decision of the Supreme Court, shall be excluded in computing the period 
of limitation referred to in clause (6) of sub-section (2) where proceedings for 
revision have been initiated by way of issue of a notice under this section. 


(6) Where the issuance of an order under sub-section (/) is stayed by the order 
of a Court or Appellate Tribunal, the period of such stay shall be excluded in 
computing the period of limitation referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2). 


(7) For the purposes of this section, the expression “record” shall include all 
records relating to any proceedings under this Act available at the time of 
examination by the revisional authority. 


29. (/) Any taxable person aggrieved by any order of the adjudicating 
authority may, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the order 
appealed against by such person, appeal to such appellate authority, not below the 
rank of a Commissioner, authorised in this behalf, by an order of the Board, in such 
form and manner, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The proper officer, not below the rank of Commissioner, may on his own 
motion, call for and examine the record of any proceedings in which an adjudicating 
authority has passed any order under this Act, for the purpose of satisfying himself 
as to the legality or propriety of the such order and may, by order, direct any officer 
subordinate to him to apply to the appellate authority within six months from the 
date of communication of the order of the adjudicating authority for the 
determination of such points arising out of the said decision or order as may be 
specified by such proper officer in his order. 


(3) Where, in pursuance of an order under sub-section (2), the authorised 
officer makes an application to the appellate authority, such application shall be 
dealt with by the appellate authority as if it were an appeal made against the decision 
or order of the adjudicating authority and such authorised officer were an appellant 
and the provisions of this Act relating to appeals shall apply to such application. 


(4) Every appeal under this section shall be verified in such manner, as may 
be prescribed. 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(5) No appeal shall be filed under sub-section (/), unless the appellant has 
paid— 


(a) in full, such part of the amount of cess, interest, fine, fee and penalty 
arising from the impugned order, as is admitted by him; and 


(b) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the remaining amount of cess in 
dispute arising from the said order, subject to a maximum of twenty-five crore 
rupees, in relation to which the appeal has been filed. 


(6) Where the appellant has paid the amount under sub-section (5), the 
recovery proceedings for the balance amount shall be deemed to be stayed. 


(7) The appellate authority shall give the appellant a reasonable opportunity 
of being heard. 


(8) The appellate authority may, if sufficient cause is shown at any stage of 
hearing of an appeal, grant time to the parties or any of them and adjourn the hearing 
of the appeal for reasons to be recorded in writing. 


(9) After the receipt of any appeal under this section, the appellate authority 
shall, after giving the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter 
and after making such further inquiry as may be necessary, pass such order, as he 
thinks just and proper, confirming, modifying or annulling the order appealed 
against but shall not refer the case back to the adjudicating authority that passed the 
said order. 


(J0) The order of the appellate authority disposing of the appeal shall be in 
writing and shall state the points for determination, the decision thereon and the 
reasons for such decision. 


(//) The appellate authority shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide 
every appeal within a period of six months from the date on which it is filed. 


30. (J) Any person aggrieved by an order of the appellate authority or 
revisional authority, may appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against such order in such 
form and manner, as may be prescribed, within a period of three months from the 
date of receipt of such order sought to be appealed against by him or by the proper 
officer, or, as the case may be. 


(2) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the appeal an 
opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or annulling the order appealed against, or may refer the case back to the 
proper officer who passed such order with such directions as it may think fit, for a 
fresh adjudication, after taking additional evidence, if necessary. 


(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, at any time within a period of six months 
from the date of such order, with a view to rectify any mistake or error apparent on 
the face of the record or for any other sufficient reason, amend any order passed by 
it under sub-section (/) and shall make such amendments if the mistake is brought 
to its notice by the proper officer or the other party to the appeal. 


(4) An amendment made under sub-section (3) which has the effect of 
enhancing an assessment or reducing a refund, or otherwise increasing the liability 
of the other party, shall not be made under this sub-section, unless the Appellate 
Tribunal has given notice to him of its intention to do so and has allowed him a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall, where it is possible to do so, hear and decide 
every appeal within a period of three years from the date on which such appeal is 
filed. 


Appeals to 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 


Appearance by 
authorised 
representative. 


Appeal to High 
Court. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


(6) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order passed under this 
section to the proper officer and the other party to the appeal. 


(7) The provisions of sub-sections (/), (2), (5) and (6) of section 29C of the 
Customs Act, 962, shall apply to the Appellate Tribunal in the discharge of its 
functions under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its functions under 
the Customs Act, 962. 


(8) The President or any other member of the Appellate Tribunal authorised 
in this behalf by the President may, sitting singly, dispose of any case which has 
been allotted to the Bench of which he is a member, where the amount of cess or 
fine or penalty involved, does not exceed fifty lakh rupees. 


3. (J) Any person who is entitled or required to appear before an adjudicating 
authority or a revisional authority or the Appellate Tribunal in connection with any 
proceedings under this Act, otherwise than when required under this Act to appear 
personally for examination on oath or affirmation, may, subject to the other 
provisions of this section, appear by an authorised representative. 


(2) For the purposes of this section, “authorised representative” means a 
person authorised by the person referred to in sub-section (/) to appear on his behalf, 
being— 


(a) his relative or regular employee; or 


(6) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practise in any Civil Court in 
India; or 


(c) any person who has acquired such qualifications, as may be 
prescribed, for this purpose. 


32. (/) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Appellate Tribunal 
may file an appeal to the High Court and the High Court may admit such appeal, if 
it is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law. 


(2) An appeal under sub-section (/) shall be filed within a period of one 
hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of the order appealed against by 
the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form and verified in such manner, as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) Irrespective of sub-section (2), the High Court may entertain an appeal 
after the expiry of the period specified in the said sub-section, if it is satisfied that 
there was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within such period. 


(4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is 
involved in any case, it shall formulate that question and the appeal shall be heard 
only on the question so formulated, and the respondents shall, at the hearing of the 
appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question. 


(5) The High Court may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, hear the appeal 
on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that 
the case involves such question. 


(6) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formulated and deliver 
such judgment thereon containing the grounds on which such decision is founded 
and may award such cost as it deems fit. 


(7) The High Court may determine any issue, which— 
(a) has not been determined by the Appellate Tribunal; or 


(6) has been wrongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason 
of a decision on such question of law referred to in sub-section (4). 


52 of 962. 


5 of 908. 


5 of 908. 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(8) Where an appeal has been filed before the High Court, it shall be heard by 
a Bench of not less than two Judges of the High Court, and shall be decided in 
accordance with the opinion of such Judges or of the majority, if any, of such Judges. 


(9) Where the High Court delivers a judgment in an appeal filed before it under 
this section, effect shall be given to such judgment by either side on the basis of a 
certified copy of the judgment. 


(0) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 908, relating to appeals to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply 
in the case of appeals under this section. 


33. (।) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court— 
(a) from any order passed by the High Court; or 


(0) from any judgment or order passed by the High Court in an appeal 
made under section 32 in any case which, on its own motion or on an 
application made by or on behalf of the party aggrieved, immediately after 
passing of the judgment or order, the High Court certifies to be a fit one for 
appeal to the Supreme Court. 


(2) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 908, relating to appeals to 
the Supreme Court shall, so far as may be, apply in the case of appeals under this 
section as they apply in the case of appeals from decrees of a High Court. 


(3) Where the judgment of the High Court is varied or reversed in the appeal, 
effect shall be given to the order of the Supreme Court by either side on the basis of 
a certified copy of the said order. 


CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
34. (/) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is expedient 
or necessary in the public interest so to do, by notification, add to Schedule I any 


goods and on any such notification being issued, the said Schedule shall be deemed 
to be amended accordingly. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/) shall, as soon as possible 
after it is issued, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


35. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the abatement or other conditions subject to which the cess 
determined shall be payable under sub-section (6) of section 5; 


(b) the conditions subject to which the cess shall be abated due to 
non-operation under sub-section (7) of section 5; 


(c) the activities, schemes and programmes for national defence and 
security or public health for which the cess may be utilised under 
sub-section (3) of section 7; 


(d) the form and manner of registration by a taxable person with the 
jurisdictional proper officer under sub-section (/) of section 8; 


(e) the manner and the period within which the proper officer may cancel 
a registration under sub-section (2) of section 8; 


Appeals to 
Supreme Court. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
amend 

Schedule I. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 35 


(f) the form, manner and conditions subject to which taxable person may 
apply for revocation of cancellation of registration and the manner and the 
period within which the proper officer may decide upon the application for 
revocation of cancellation of registration under sub-section (5) of section 8; 


(g) the form, manner and period within which self-declaration shall be 
furnished by the taxable person and the other technical or operational 
particulars to be contained in the said declaration under sub-section (/) of 
section 9; 


(A) the period, form and manner for furnishing a revised declaration, for 
any change in the relevant parameters, by the taxable person under 
sub-section (2) of section 9; 


(7) the form, manner and period within which the proper officer shall do 
the calibration, verification or confirmation of the declaration filed by the 
taxable person under sub-section (4) of section 9; 


(7) the oversight, monitoring or verification mechanism to be complied 
with by the taxable person under sub-section (6) of section 9; 


(k) the manner for collection of cess from taxable person under 
sub-section (/), and the form, manner, the period within which and the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which return shall be furnished by the 
taxable person under sub-section (2), of section 0; 


(0) the form and manner of rectification of omission or incorrect 
particulars filled in the return by a taxable person under sub-section (4) of 
section l0; 


(m) the form and manner of the notice issued by the proper officer to a 
taxable person who fails to furnish the return within the specified time under 
sub-section (5) of section 0; 


(n) the manner of information to the taxable person of the discrepancies 
noticed in his return by the proper officer under sub-section (/) of section ; 


(०) the period, frequency and manner of audit to be undertaken by the 
proper officer under sub-section (/), and the manner in which the taxable 
person shall be informed of the said audit under sub-section (3), of section 2; 


(p) the manner of declaration of preparation or maintenance of records 
to the proper officer by the taxable person under clause (a) of sub-section (2) 
of section 4; 


(q) the manner of calculation of interest under sub-section (2) of 
section 7; 


(r) the manner of compounding of offences by the proper officer under 
sub-section (/), and the offences or class of persons to whom compounding 
shall not be available under clause (e) of sub-section (2), of section 23; 


(s) the amount for compounding of offences under sub-section (4) of 
section 23; 


(0) the manner and quantum for execution of bonds or furnishing of 
security for release of seized goods or machines on provisional basis under 
sub-section (8) of section 24; 


(u) the manner of disposal of goods or machines seized by the proper 
officer under sub-section (//), and the manner of preparation of inventory of 
the seized goods under sub-section (/2), of section 24; 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(v) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the appellate authority 
under sub-section (/), and the manner of verification of such appeal under 
sub-section (4), of section 29; 


(w) the form and manner of preferring appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
under sub-section (/) of section 30; 


(x) the qualifications for a person for becoming an authorised 
representative under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3; 


(v) the form for appeals preferred by the aggrieved person before the 
High Court and the manner of verification of such appeal under 
sub-section (2) of section 32; 


(z) any other matter which is to be or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


36. Every rule made and every notification issued under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament while 
it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in such rule or notification, or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made or notification should not be issued, the rule or 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification. 


37. Where any rule, notification or order made or issued under this Act or any 
notification or order issued under such rule, is amended, repealed, superseded or 
rescinded, then, unless a different intention appears, such amendment, repeal, 
supersession or rescinding shall not— 


(a) revive anything not in force or existing at the time at which the 
amendment, repeal, supersession or rescinding takes effect; or 


(6) affect the previous operation of any rule, notification or order so 
amended, repealed, superseded or rescinded or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder; or 


(c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or 
incurred under any rule, notification or order so amended, repealed, 
superseded or rescinded; or 


(d) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of 
any offence committed under or in violation of any rule, notification or order 
so amended, repealed, superseded or rescinded; or 


(e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any 
such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as 
aforesaid, 


and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued 
or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if the 
rule, notification or order, as the case may be, had not been amended, repealed, 
superseded or rescinded. 


38. (J) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or any officer of the Central Government for anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done, in pursuance of this Act or any rule 
made thereunder. 


Laying before 
Parliament. 


Effect of 
amendments, 
etc., of rules, 
notifications or 
orders. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 37 


(2) No proceeding, other than a suit, shall be commenced against the Central 
Government or any officer of the Central Government for anything done or 
purported to have been done in pursuance of this Act or any rule made thereunder, 
without giving the Central Government or such officer a month’s previous notice in 
writing of the intended proceeding and of the cause thereof or after the expiration 
of three months from the accrual of such cause. 


39. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years 
from the commencement of this Act. 


(3) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is 
made, be laid before each House of Parliament. 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


SCHEDULE I 
[See sections 2(0) and (p) and 4(/)] 
Sl. No. Chapter / Heading / Sub-heading / Tariff Description of 
item Goods 
() (2) (3) 
l. 206 90 20 Pan masala 
2. Any other goods which may be notified 


Explanation — 


99 66 


(Z) In this Schedule, reference to a “tariff item’, “heading”, “sub-heading” and 
“Chapter”, wherever they occur, shall mean respectively a tariff item, heading, 
sub-heading and Chapter in the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 975 
(5l of 975). 


(2) The rules for the interpretation of the First Schedule to the Customs Tariff 
Act, 975 (5 of 975), the section and Chapter Notes and the General Explanatory 
Notes of the First Schedule shall, so far as may be, apply to the interpretation of this 
Schedule. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 39 
SCHEDULE I 
[See sections 2(0), 4(/), 5 and 6] 
TABLE | 
Applicable to wholly or partly machine-based process 
Sl. Number of pouches or Weight of the specified | Amount of cess 
No. tins or containers per goods per pouch or tin per month per 
minute (Maximum rated or container machine 
speed of machine) (rupees in lakhs) 
() (2) (3) (4) 
| Up to 500 Up to 2.5 grams 0.00 
Above 2.5 grams but 364.00 
below 0 grams 
Above |0 grams 849.00 
2; 50 to 000 Up to 2.5 grams 202.00 
Above 2.5 grams but 728.00 
below 0 grams 
Above |0 grams 698.00 
3. 00 to 500 Up to 2.5 grams 303.00 
Above 2.5 grams but 092.00 
below 0 grams 
Above |0 grams 2547 
4. Above 500 Up to 2.5 grams 0 x S/450 
Above 2.5 grams but 364 x S/450 
below 0 grams 
Above 0 grams 849 x S/450 
TABLE 2 
Applicable to wholly manual process 
Sl. No. Speed or capacity Weight of the Amount of cess 
of process specified goods per month 
per pouch or tin —_— (rupees in lakhs) 
or container 
() (2) (3) (4) 
I. Any Any I] 
Notes: 


(7) For the purposes of this Schedule, in Table | in column (4) of the table 
represents maximum rated capacity of a machine. 


above, the term ‘ 


‘ S 99 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) For the purposes of this Schedule, where a packing machine contains 
multiple tracks or multiple packing lines and, in addition to packing the specified 
goods in pouches, performs any supplementary processes such as moulding, shaping 
or otherwise giving a definite form to the pouches for brand distinction or for 
prevention of counterfeiting, two such tracks or lines shall be deemed to constitute 
one individual packing machine for the purpose of calculating the cess liability. 


(3) The number of packing machines to be taken into account for computation 
of the cess specified in this Schedule shall be determined in accordance with the 
rules prescribed by the Central Government. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 4l 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
It is proposed to levy the Health Security se National Security Cess to 
contribute towards twin purposes of enabling targeted utilisation for public health, 
as well as national security. The Health Security se National Security Cess Bill 
proposes to levy cess on the machines installed or processes undertaken by which 
the specified goods, namely, pan masala is manufactured or produced, whether 
manually or through hybrid processes. 


2. The cess is linked to the production capacity of machines or other processes 
rather than the quantity actually produced of such specified goods. The Bill provides 
for taxable persons to self-declare all machines or processes for each factory or 
premises, and the cess would be calculated in the aggregate for each such location. 
The Bill also provides that proper officer may verify and recalibrate these 
declarations through prescribed mechanisms. Compliance is proposed to be ensured 
through technological and inspection-based monitoring. 


3. The notes on clauses explain the various provisions contained in the Bill. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 28th November, 2025. 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


Notes on clauses 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides for the definitions of various expressions used in 
the proposed legislation. 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for definition of taxable person who shall be 
liable to pay cess under the proposed legislation and clarifies that the cess shall be 
payable even if the said person is availing or are eligible for exemption under any 
alternate taxation scheme. 


Clause 4 of the Bill is the charging section elaborating on the levy and 
collection of the Health Security se National Security Cess. It, inter alia, provides 
that the cess shall be leviable on the machines installed or other processes 
undertaken by him for the manufacture or production of the specified goods referred 
to in Schedule I. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for the manner of computation of cess 
and to specify that the cess shall be as per the amount specified in Schedule II for 
such combination of process, speed or capacity and weight of the machine installed 
or process undertaken. 


Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to increase the cess 
payable in public interest up to twice the amount of cess payable as per Schedule II. 


Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide for the purpose of levy of the cess and 
specifies that the purpose shall be to meet expenditure on the national security of 
India and for public health. 


Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide for registration by the taxable persons 
and the related cancellation of registration and revocation of cancellation of 
registration provisions. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide that every taxable person shall have to 
file a declaration in respect of machine installed or processes undertaken for the 
manufacture of the specified goods and that the said declaration shall be subject to 
calibration, verification and confirmation by the proper officer. 


Clause 0 of the Bill seeks to provide for provisions related to the payment of 
cess and filing of returns by the taxable person. 


Clause |] of the Bill seeks to provide for scrutiny and assessment of the return 
and related particulars furnished by the registered taxable person. 


Clause |2 of the Bill seeks to provide for audit of the registered taxable person 
by a proper officer, not below the rank of a Commissioner or an officer authorised 
by him. 


Clause |3 of the Bill empowers the proper officer to summon persons to give 
evidence and produce documents under the Bill. 


Clause |4 of the Bill seeks to provide that the proper officer shall have access 
to the business premises for the purposes of carrying out any audit, scrutiny, 
verification and checks, as may be necessary to safeguard the interest of revenue. 


Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide that officers of police, railways, customs 
and those officers engaged in the collection of land revenue, including village 
officers, officers of the State Governments and Union territory Administrations shall 
assist the proper officer when called for. 


Clause |6 of the Bill seeks to provide that where any cess has not been paid 
or short paid or erroneously refunded, the proper officer shall serve notice on the 
taxable person chargeable with cess for determination of the cess not paid or short 
paid or erroneously refunded. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


Clause |7 of the Bill seeks to specify and quantify the interest to be paid in 
case of delay in payment of cess by the taxable person. 


Clause (8 of the Bill seeks to provide for penalty for certain contraventions 
under the Bill. 


Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide for punishments for offences under the 
Bill and also specifies the offences that shall be cognizable and non-bailable and the 
offences that shall be non-cognizable and bailable. 


Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to make provisions in respect of offences by 
companies. 


Clause 2\ of the Bill seeks to provide that no Court shall take cognizance of 
any offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder except with the 
previous sanction of the proper officer, not below the rank of Commissioner. 


Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to provide that in any prosecution for an offence 
under this Act which requires a culpable mental state on the part of the accused, the 
Court shall presume the existence of such mental state but it shall be a defence for 
the accused to prove the fact that he had no such mental state with respect to the act 
charged as an offence. 


Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide the provisions relating to compounding 
of offences under the proposed legislation. 


Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide for the powers of the proper officer for 
inspection of any places of business of the taxable person or warehouse or go down, 
where the specified goods so manufactured or produced are stored, search and 
seizure of such goods, machines, documents or books or things which are secreted 
at a place. 


Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide that goods or machines shall be liable 
to confiscation where there is a contravention of the provisions of the Bill and where 
the taxable person has any machine installed or undertakes any process for the 
manufacture or production of the specified goods with the intention to evade tax. 


Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide that where proper officer, not below the 
rank of Commissioner, has reasons to believe that contraventions of specific 
provisions have taken place by a taxable person, he may authorise the arrest of such 
person. 


Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide that recovery of any amount due from a 
taxable person shall be in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue and officers 
of police, central tax and customs and all officers of the Central Government and 
State Governments engaged in the collection of land revenue, and all village officers 
are empowered and required to assist the proper officer. 


Clause 28 of the Bill empowers the revisional authority to revise the orders 
passed by the adjudicating authority. 


Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to provide that the order of the adjudicating 
authority may, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the order 
appealed against by the aggrieved person, appeal to the appellate authority. 


Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 


Clause 3. of the Bill seeks to provide that any person who is entitled or 
required to appear before an adjudicating authority or a revisional authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal in connection with any proceedings under this Act, otherwise 
than when required under this Act to appear personally for examination on oath or 
affirmation, may, subject to the other provisions of this section, appear through an 
authorised representative. 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeal to the High Court on any 
substantial question of law. 


Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeal to the Supreme Court as 
against any order passed by the High Court. 


Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to amend Schedule I 
to the proposed legislation by issuance of a notification in order to add more goods 
to the said Schedule. 


Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. 


Clause 36 of the Bill specifies that every rule made and every notification 
issued under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, 
before each House of Parliament. 


Clause 37 of the Bill provides for savings of earlier actions in case of 
amendments, etc., of rules, notifications or orders, except when a different intention 
appears. 


Clause 38 of the Bill provides for protection of action taken in good faith by 
the officers under the proposed legislation. 


Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue orders to 
remove difficulties in implementation of the provisions of the proposed legislation. 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 45 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill, if enacted and brought into force, will not involve any recurring or 
non-recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part J— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Sub-clause (/) of clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Central Government 


to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. 
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules 
may be made. These matters, inter alia, include— 


(a) the abatement or other conditions subject to which the cess 
determined shall be payable under sub-section (6) of section 5; (0) the 
conditions subject to which the cess shall be abated due to non-operation under 
sub-section (7) of section 5; (c) the activities, schemes and programmes for 
national defence and security or public health for which the cess may be 
utilised under sub-section (3) of section 7; (d) the form and manner of 
registration by a taxable person with the jurisdictional proper officer under 
sub-section (/) of section 8; (e) the manner and the period within which the 
proper officer may cancel a registration under sub-section (2) of section 8; 
(f) the form, manner and conditions subject to which taxable person may apply 
for revocation of cancellation of registration and the manner and the period 
within which the proper officer may decide upon the application for revocation 
of cancellation of registration under sub-section (5) of section 8; (g) the form, 
manner and period within which self-declaration shall be furnished by the 
taxable person and the other technical or operational particulars to be 
contained in the said declaration under sub-section (/) of section 9; (h) the 
period, form and manner for furnishing a revised declaration, for any change 
in the relevant parameters, by the taxable person under sub-section (2) of 
section 9; 6) the form, manner and period within which the proper officer shall 
do the calibration, verification or confirmation of the declaration filed by the 
taxable person under sub-section (4) of section 9; (7) the oversight, monitoring 
or verification mechanism to be complied with by the taxable person under 
sub-section (6) of section 9; (k) the manner for collection of cess from taxable 
person under sub-section (/), and the form, manner, the period within which 
and the conditions and restrictions subject to which return shall be furnished 
by the taxable person under sub-section (2), of section 0; (J) the form and 
manner of rectification of omission or incorrect particulars filled in the return 
by a taxable person under sub-section (4) of section l0; (m) the form and 
manner of the notice issued by the proper officer to a taxable person who fails 
to furnish the return within the specified time under sub-section (5) of 
section 0; (४0) the manner of information to the taxable person of the 
discrepancies noticed in his return by the proper officer under sub-section (/) 
of section l; (0) the period, frequency and manner of audit to be undertaken 
by the proper officer under sub-section (/), and the manner in which the 
taxable person shall be informed of the said audit under sub-section (3), of 
section |2; (p) the manner of declaration of preparation or maintenance of 
records to the proper officer by the taxable person under clause (a) of 
sub-section (2) of section 4; (g) the manner of calculation of interest under 
sub-section (2) of section 7; (7) the manner of compounding of offences by 
the proper officer under sub-section (/), and the offences or class of persons 
to whom compounding shall not be available under clause (e) of 
sub-section (2), of section 23; (s) the amount for compounding of offences 
under sub-section (4) of section 23; (0) the manner and quantum for execution 
of bonds or furnishing of security for release of seized goods or machines on 
provisional basis under sub-section (8) of section 24; (४) the manner of 
disposal of goods or machines seized by the proper officer under 
sub-section (//), and the manner of preparation of inventory of the seized goods 
under sub-section (/2), of section 24; (v) the form and manner of preferring 
appeal to the appellate authority under sub-section (/), and the manner of 
verification of such appeal under sub-section (4), of section 29; (w) the form and 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 47 


manner of preferring appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section (/) of 
section 30; (x) the qualifications for a person for becoming an authorised 
representative under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3; (2) the form 
for appeals preferred by the aggrieved person before the High Court and the 
manner of verification of such appeal under sub-section (2) of section 32; 
(z) any other matter which is to be or in respect of which provision is to be 
made, by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


2. Clause 36 of the Bill provides that every rule made and every notification 
issued under the proposed legislation are required to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 


3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure 
or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. 
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 


MGIPMRND—368GI(S4)—-2-2025. 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ by KSHTZ 
MOHAN 0४७2००७२2० 


22:44:0 +0530' 


