रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


RNa क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-02062025-263537 
CG-DL-E-02062025-263537 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं० 21] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, जून 2, 2025/ज्येष्ठ 12, 1947 (शक) 
No. 21] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, JUNE 2, 2025/JYAISTHA 12, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 2nd June, 2025/Jyaistha 12, 1947 (Saka) 


THE LADAKH CIVIL SERVICES DECENTRALIZATION AND 
RECRUITMENT (AMENDMENT) REGULATION, 2025 


No. 4 OF 2025 
Promulgated by the President in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India. 


A Regulation further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services 
Decentralization and Recruitment Act, 2010 in its application to the Union 
territory of Ladakh. 

In exercise of the powers conferred by article 240 of the Constitution 

read with sub-section (2) of section 58 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation 

34 of 2019. Act, 2019, the President is pleased to promulgate the following Regulation made by 
her:— 


1. (J) This Regulation may be called the Ladakh Civil Services 
Decentralization and Recruitment (Amendment) Regulation, 2025. 


Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Ladakh. 


(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Construction 2. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services Decentralization and 


Se Be Recruitment Act, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),— 


eeptessions by (a) for the words “State of Jammu and Kashmir”, wherever they occur, 


tain oth हे ; : 
palin tend the words “Union territory of Ladakh” shall be substituted; 


XVI of 2010. 


(0) for the words “Jammu and Kashmir’, wherever they occur, the word 
“Ladakh” shall be substituted; 


(c) for the word “Government”, wherever it occurs, the word 
“Administration” shall be substituted; 


(d) for the words “Government Gazette”, wherever they occur, the words 
“Official Gazette of the Union territory of Ladakh” shall be substituted; 


(e) for the words “State Cadre”, wherever they occur, the words “Union 
territory Cadre” shall be substituted; 


© 


(f) the words “, Divisional’, “or Divisional”, “Divisional or’, “or 
Division” and “or the Division”, wherever they occur, shall be omitted; 


(8) for the words “permanent resident of the State”, wherever they occur, 
the words “domicile of the Union territory of Ladakh” shall be substituted. 


pani of 3. For section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 


for section 2. namely:— 


Definitions. ‘2. In this Regulation, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Administration” means the Administration of the Union 
territory of Ladakh; 


(0) “Appellate Authority” means the Authority who is empowered 
to hear the appeals against the decision of the Competent Authority; 


(c) “Competent Authority’ means the Authority who is 
empowered to issue a domicile certificate; 


(d) “District Cadre” means the cadre of a department in a district 
comprising all the posts whether executive, ministerial or technical, the 
basic pay of which does not exceed the basic pay for the post of Senior 
Assistant, but does not include the posts falling under the Union territory 
Cadre; 


(e) “domicile” means the domicile as defined in section 3A of this 
Regulation; 


(f) “domicile certificate” means the domicile certificate referred to 
in section 3B of this Regulation; 


(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 
Gazette of the Union territory of Ladakh and the expression “notify” 
shall be construed accordingly; 


(0) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the 
Administration of the Union territory of Ladakh; 


(i) “Union territory” means the Union territory of Ladakh; 


(7) “Union territory Cadre” means the sanctioned strength of all 
Gazetted and non-Gazetted posts borne, on the establishment of the 
headquarter offices of all the departments having jurisdiction over the 


Sec. 1] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


entire Union territory, but does not include the posts borne on the District 
Cadre.’. 


4. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“3. The provisions of this Regulation shall apply to all the Gazetted and 
non-Gazetted posts borne on the establishment of any Department or Service 
of the Administration or a company under the control of Administration: 


Provided that the provisions of this Regulation shall not apply to— 


(i) the posts for which any special procedure is laid down under 
any law of the Union territory; and 


(ii) such other posts as may be excluded from the operation of this 
Regulation by the notification issued by the Administration in this behalf 
from time to time.”. 


5. After section 3 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“3A. (J) Any person who fulfils the following conditions shall be 
domicile of the Union territory for the purposes of appointment to any post 
under the Union territory or under a local or other authority (other than 
cantonment Board) within the Union territory, namely:— 


(a) who has resided for a period of fifteen years in the Union 
territory; or 


(b) who has studied for a period of seven years and appeared in 
class 10th or 12th examination in an educational institution located in 
the Union territory. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the following 
persons shall be domicile under sub-section (/), namely:— 


(a) children of those Central Government Officials, All India 
Services Officers, Officials of Public Sector Undertaking and 
Autonomous body of Central Government, Public Sector Banks, 
Officials of Statutory bodies, Officials of the Central Universities and 
recognised Research institutes of Central Government who shall have 
served in the Union territory for a total period of ten years; 


(6) the children of parents who fulfils any of the conditions 
specified in sub-section (/); or 


(c) the children of such residents of Union territory who resides 
outside the Union territory in connection with their employment or 
business or other professional or vocational reasons, but their parents 
fulfil any of the conditions specified in sub-section (J). 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the spouse of a 
domicile shall also be deemed to be a domicile for the purposes of sub-section (/). 


3B. (J) The Tehsildar within his territorial jurisdiction shall be the 
Competent Authority for issuance of domicile certificate: 


Provided that the Administration of the Union territory may notify any 
other officer to be the Competent Authority for issuance of domicile 
certificate. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 3. 


Applications of 
this Regulation. 


Insertion of new 
sections 3A and 
3B. 


Domicile for 
purpose of 
appointment in 
any service to 
Union territory. 


Issuance of 
domicile 
certificate. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Omission of 
section 7. 


Omission of 
section 10. 


Amendment of 
section 11. 


Insertion of new 
section 13A. 


Application of 
other laws not 
barred. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 14. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(2) The applicant may apply in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed to the Competent Authority who shall after due verification issue such 
certificate in such form as may be determined by the Competent Authority. 


(3) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Competent Authority 
may file an appeal before the concerned Deputy Commissioner who shall be 
the Appellate Authority for deciding the appeal, after providing an opportunity 
of being heard to the parties, within a period of sixty days from the date of 
receipt of appeal: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain the appeal after the 
expiry of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by a sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in the given time.”. 


6. In section 4 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following 


sub-section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the posts 
borne on temporary organisations created for specified works or projects, 
other than the work charged establishment shall be treated as posts in the 
Union territory Cadre concerned for purposes of recruitment only.”. 


7. In section 5 of the principal Act,— 


(i) for the words “State Service Selection Board”, occurring at both the 
places, the words “Ladakh Subordinate Services Staff Selection Board” shall 
be substituted; 


(ii) in sub-section (/), the proviso shall be omitted. 

8. Section 7 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 

9. Section 10 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 

10. In section 11 of the principal Act,— 
(i) for the word “Divisional”, the word “District” shall be substituted; 
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted. 


11. After section 13 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“13A. The provisions of this Regulation shall be in addition to and not 
in derogation of any other law relating to recruitment for the time being in 
force in the Union territory of Ladakh.”. 


12. For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“14, (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Regulation, the Administration may by order published in the Official Gazette 
of Union territory of Ladakh, make such provisions not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Regulation as may appear to it to be necessary for removing 
the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of two years from the date of commencement of this Regulation. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.”’. 


Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


13. For section 15 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“15. (J) The Administration may, by notification, make rules not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Regulation for carrying out the 
purposes of this Regulation. 


(2) Any rule made under this Regulation shall, as soon as may be after 
it is made, be laid before each House of Parliament.”’. 


DROUPADI MURMU, 
President. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 15. 


Power to make 
rules. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 


MGIPMRND—39GI(S4)—2-6-2025. 


Digitally signed 


KSHITIZ byksuinz 


MOHAN 


MOHAN bate: 2025.06.02 


23:57:56 +05'30° 


