रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-24072025-264932 
CG-DL-E-24072025-264932 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 2) नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, जुलाई 23, 2025/श्रावण i, 947 (शक) 
No. 2] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, JULY 23, 2025/SRAVANA , 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on 23rd July, 2025:— 
BLL No. 76 oF 2025 


A Bill to provide for the development and promotion of sports, welfare measures for 
sportspersons, ethical practices based on basic universal principles of good 
governance, ethics and fair play of the Olympic and sports movement, the 
Olympic Charter, the Paralympic Charter, international best practices and 
established legal standards and to provide for the resolution of sports 
grievances and sports disputes in a unified, equitable and effective manner 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


WHEREAS the Olympic Charter and the Paralympic Charter emphasise 
impeccable ethical behaviour in sports governance, necessitating the national sports 
governing bodies to align with such global governance standards; 


AND WHEREAS the national sports governing bodies discharge important public 
functions in the country and it is pertinent for these bodies to manage their internal 
and external affairs in an open, fair and transparent manner in the public interest; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


AND WHEREAS the Government of India respects the principle of autonomy of 
the sports governing bodies in the country in line with the fundamental principles 
enshrined in the Olympic Charter and the Paralympic Charter; 

AND WHEREAS the Government of India recognises the importance of 
providing accessible, fair and effective measures for the resolution of grievances and 
disputes relating to sports; 

AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to give effect to the aforesaid 
objectives. 

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 

CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 

l. () This Act may be called the National Sports Governance Act, 2025. 

(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed 
for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force 
of that provision. 

2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “ad hoc administrative body” means a body constituted for ad hoc 
administration under section |]; 


(0) “affiliate unit” means the State, district or other units of,— 
(i) the National Olympic Committee; 
(ii) the National Paralympic Committee; 
(iii) the National Sports Federation; and 
(iv) the Regional Sports Federation; 


(c) “Athletes Committee”, “Disputes Resolution Committee”, “Ethics 
Committee” and “Executive Committee”, by whatever name called, means the 
“Athletes Committee”, “Disputes Resolution Committee”, “Ethics Committee” 
and “Executive Committee”, respectively, of a National Sports Body; 


(d) “Board” means the National Sports Board established under 
sub-section (/) of section 5; 


(e) “Board recognition” means recognition of a sports organisation by 
the Board under this Act; 


(f) “bye-laws” means the memorandum of association or articles of 
association, by whatever name called, of a sports organisation; 


(g) “designated sport” means any sport discipline as may be specified by 
the Central Government, by notification, to be a designated sport for a specific 
region or State or for the whole of India; 


(A) “International Charters and Statutes” means the Olympic Charter and 
other Charters and Statutes of the international sports governing bodies and 
include any bye-laws, rules, regulations or constitution, by whatever name 
called, as may be adopted, amended or issued by such bodies from time to time; 


(7) “International Federation” means— 


(i) a federation recognised as such by the International Olympic 
Committee in respect of an Olympic sport; or 


(ii) a federation recognised as such by the International Paralympic 
Committee in respect of a Paralympic sport; or 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(iii) a federation which regulates the sport at international level in 
respect of non-Olympic or non-Paralympic sports; 


(j) “International Olympic Committee” means the governing body for 
the Olympic Games; 


(k) “International Paralympic Committee” means the governing body for 
the Paralympic Games; 


(0) “international recognition” means the recognition of a national sports 
governing body by the concerned international sports governing body; 


(m) “International Sports Body” means an international sports governing 
body such as the International Olympic Committee or the International 
Paralympic Committee or International Federation or a continental governing 
body for sports; 


(n) “National Olympic Committee” means the National Olympic 
Committee established under section 3 as a national sports governing body and 
recognised as the National Olympic Committee of India by the International 
Olympic Committee; 


(०) “National Paralympic Committee” means the National Paralympic 
Committee established under section 3 as a national sports governing body and 
recognised as the National Paralympic Committee of India by the International 
Paralympic Committee; 


(p) “National Sports Body” means a national sports governing body such 
as the National Olympic Committee or the National Paralympic Committee or 
the National Sports Federation or the Regional Sports Federation, established 
under section 3; 


(4) “National Sports Election Panel” means the National Sports Election 
Panel notified under section 6 to oversee the conduct of free and fair elections 
to the Executive Committee and the Athletes Committee of the National Sports 
Bodies; 


(r) “National Sports Federation” means a National Sports Federation 
established under section 3 as a national sports governing body for a 
designated sport; 


(s) “National Sports Promotion Organisation” means a_ sports 
organisation or body contributing towards the development of sports, such as 
talent identification and their nurturing, policy advocacy relating to sports 
administration or welfare and recognised by the Board under sub-section (7) 
of section 8; 


(0) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the expression “notify” or “notified”, shall be construed accordingly; 


(४) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central 
Government under this Act; 


(v) “recognised sports organisation” means a sports organisation 
recognised by the Board as a National Sports Body under sub-section (/) of 
section 8; 


(w) “Regional Sports Federation” means a Regional Sports Federation 
established under section 3 as national sports governing body for a designated 
sport; 


(x) “regulations” means regulations made by the Board under this Act; 


(0) “Secretary General” means the Secretary General or the Secretary of 
a National Sports Body; 


Establishment of 
national sports 
governing 
bodies. 


Compliance with 
certain 
requirements by 
National Sports 
Bodies. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(z) “sportsperson of outstanding merit” means a sportsperson referred to 
in the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 4; 


(za) “State” means a State specified in the First Schedule to the 
Constitution and includes a Union territory; 


(zb) “Tribunal” means the National Sports Tribunal constituted under 
sub-section (/) of section 7. 


CHAPTER IT 
NATIONAL SPORTS BODIES 


3. (J) The following bodies shall be established as the national sports 
governing bodies for their respective recognised sports organisations, namely:— 


(a) the National Olympic Committee; 

(b) the National Paralympic Committee; 

(c) a National Sports Federation for each designated sport; and 
(d) a Regional Sports Federation for each designated sport. 


(2) There shall be only one National Olympic Committee and one National 
Paralympic Committee, each governing multi-sport disciplines. 


(3) The National Olympic Committee shall have an international recognition 
and affiliation of the International Olympic Committee. 


(4) The National Paralympic Committee shall have an international 
recognition and affiliation of the International Paralympic Committee. 


(5) Every National Sports Federation shall have an international recognition 
and affiliation of the concerned international sports governing body: 


Provided that this sub-section shall not apply to a designated sport which does 
not have an international sports governing body. 


(6) Every Regional Sports Federation shall have the relevant affiliations as 
may be prescribed. 


4. (/) Every National Sports Body shall have,— 


(a) a General Body, consisting of equal number of representatives from 
each of its affiliate units and such other ex officio members as per its bye-laws 
and the International Charters and Statutes, as applicable: 


Provided that it shall have representation of such sportspersons of 
outstanding merit and such other categories of persons, as may be prescribed; 


(0) an Executive Committee which shall consist of not more than fifteen 
members, of whom— 


(i) at least two shall be sportspersons of outstanding merit; 


(ii) two shall be from the Athletes Committee to be elected from 
amongst themselves; and 


(iii) such number of ex officio and other members shall be 
nominated or elected, as the case may be, as per the International 
Charters and Statutes and the bye-laws: 


Provided that at least four members shall be women: 


Provided further that the voting rights of elected representatives of the 
Athletes Committee in the Executive Committee shall be as determined by the 
bye-laws; 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(c) an Ethics Committee to be constituted as per its bye-laws and the 
International Charters and Statutes, as applicable: 


Provided that the Ethics Committee of the National Olympic Committee 
shall function as the Ethics Committee of any National Sports Body which 
does not have such Committee; 


(d) a Dispute Resolution Committee to be constituted as per its bye-laws 
and the International Charters and Statutes, as applicable: 


Provided that the Dispute Resolution Committee of the National 
Olympic Committee shall function as the Dispute Resolution Committee of 
any National Sports Body which does not have such Committee; 


(e) an Athletes Committee consisting of elected members as determined 
by the bye-laws; 


(f) a President who shall be the head of the concerned National Sports 
Body and shall preside over the meetings of its Executive Committee and the 
General Body; 


(g) a Secretary General of the concerned National Sports Body shall be 
the head of administration who shall be responsible for carrying out all 
decisions of the Executive Committee and the General Body: 


Provided that where the International Charters and Statutes provide for 
a full-time head of administration, by whatever name called, there shall not be 
an elected post of the head of administration; 


(A) a Treasurer who shall be the custodian of funds or the accounts of the 
concerned National Sports Body. 


(2) A person shall not be qualified to contest for election or seek nomination 


to, the Executive Committee, unless— 


(a) such person is a citizen of India who has attained at least twenty-five 
years of age; 


(0) such person is a sportsperson of outstanding merit or, has previously 
served as a member of the Executive Committee for at least two full terms, if 
such person is contesting election for the position of the President or the 
Secretary General or the Treasurer: 


Provided that a person may continuously hold the position of either the 
President or the Secretary General or the Treasurer, as the case may be, for up 
to three consecutive terms separately, or in combination thereof and shall be 
eligible for election to the Executive Committee after a mandatory cooling off 
period of one term; 


(c) the nomination of such person is duly proposed and seconded by a 
voting member of the General Body; 


(d) such person is not declared to be of unsound mind; 


(e) such person complies with the International Charters and Statutes and 
bye-laws relating to age and term of the Executive Committee: 


Provided that such person shall not be more than seventy years of age on 
the last date of nomination for election: 


Provided further that any person, aged between seventy and seventy-five 
years, may contest elections or seek nominations, if permitted by the 
International Charters and Statutes and the bye-laws and in case such person 
is elected, he shall serve for a full term; 


Establishment of 
National Sports 
Board. 


Powers and 
functions of 
Board. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(f) such person, if he is a government servant, has necessary approvals 
from the Government, as applicable. 


(3) The term of the Executive Committee shall be as provided in the bye-laws 
subject to a maximum period of four years. 


(4) The mode of election to different bodies, committees and offices including 
their term, eligibility criteria and disqualification of members thereof, and other 
matters of governance shall be such as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 
THE NATIONAL SPORTS BOARD 


5. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, establish a Board to be 
known as the National Sports Board, consisting of a Chairperson and such number 
of other Members as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Chairperson and the Members referred to in sub-section (/) shall be 
appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and 
standing who possesses special knowledge or practical experience in the field of 
public administration, sports governance, sports law and other related fields, on the 
recommendation of a search-cum-selection committee comprising of such number 
of persons, having wide experience in public administration, sports administration 
and recipients of national sports awards, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The salary and allowances and the term of office of the Chairperson and 
other Members of the Board and other terms and conditions of their service, 
including removal from service, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power subject to the provisions of 
this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and 
to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(5) The head office of the Board shall be at Delhi and the Board shall establish 
its branch offices at such other places as may be prescribed. 


6. The Board shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions 
to carry out the provisions of this Act, namely:— 


(a) the grant of Board recognition to sports organisations and registration 
of affiliate units and to suspend or cancel such recognition or registration; 


(6) to maintain a register of the National Sports Bodies and each of their 
respective affiliate units in such manner as may be specified by regulations; 


(c) to conduct inquiries on matters specified in section 9; 


(d) to constitute an ad hoc administrative body or to direct the concerned 
National Sports Body or their affiliate units, as the case may be, to so 
constitute, as per section |]; 


(e) to issue guidelines for formulation of the Code of Ethics by the 
National Sports Bodies; 


(f) to frame Safe Sports Policy for the protection and safety of women, 
minor athletes and other classes of persons; 


(g) maintain a roster of the National Sports Election Panel as per section 6; 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


2] of 860. 


8 of 20]3. 


2 of 882. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(A) collaborate with the International Sports Bodies and National Sports 
Bodies for the development of sports and welfare of athletes in India and to 
issue guidelines to the National Sports Bodies for ensuring compliance with 
the international standards and best practices of the Olympic and sports 
movement; 


(i) take such measures as may be prescribed, to ensure the protection of 
the rights and welfare of athletes and support personnel; and 


(j) such other powers and functions as may be prescribed. 


7. (/) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Board, appoint 
such officers and other employees as may be necessary for discharging the functions 
of the Board. 


(2) The officers and other employees of the Board shall discharge their 
functions under the general superintendence and control of the Chairperson or any 
other member of the Board to whom powers for exercising such superintendence 
and control are delegated by the Chairperson. 


(3) The qualifications, appointment, salary and allowances and other terms and 
conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the Board shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER IV 
THE GOVERNANCE OF RECOGNISED SPORTS ORGANISATIONS 


8. (/) The Board shall have the power to grant Board recognition to any sports 
organisation as a National Sports Body. 


(2) Any sports organisation desirous of obtaining Board recognition as a 
National Sports Body under this section shall apply to the Board in such form and 
manner and containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulations. 


(3) No sports organisation shall be recognised under sub-section (/) unless 
such organisation,— 


(a) is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, |860; or 


(6) is a not-for-profit company incorporated under section 8 of the 
Companies Act, 203; or 


(c) is a trust created under the Indian Trusts Act, 882; and 


(d) complies with such other criteria and conditions as may be specified 
by regulations and having the sole object of the development of sports. 


(4) The Board recognition granted under this section shall be renewed 
periodically at such intervals and in accordance with such procedure as may be 
specified by regulations. 


(5) All sports organisations recognised as National Sports Bodies by the 
Central Government before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have 
Board recognition under this Act and the provisions of this Act shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to such organisation. 


(6) All affiliate units of National Sports Bodies shall ensure that they are 
registered with the Board, subject to such conditions and in such manner, as may be 
prescribed. 


(7) The Board, subject to the prior approval of the Central Government, shall 
also have the power to recognise sports organisations participating in sports 
governance, athlete support and welfare, as National Sports Promotion 
Organisations. 


Staff of Board. 


Board recognition 
and registration. 


Power of Board 
to conduct 
inquiry. 


Power of Board 
to suspend or 
cancel Board 
recognition. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(8) The eligibility criteria for Board recognition and the manner of governance 
and functioning of the National Sports Promotion Organisations shall be such as 
may be specified by regulations: 


Provided that a National Sports Promotion Organisation recognised by the 
Central Government before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have 
been recognised as such under this Act and the provisions of this Act shall, mutatis 
mutandis, apply to such organisation: 


Provided further that the Board recognition granted under this sub-section 
shall be renewed periodically at such intervals and in accordance with such 
procedure as may be specified by regulations. 


9. The Board may, either on its own motion, or in response to complaint 
received from any person or body on matters affecting the welfare of sportspersons 
or the development of sports in the country or misuse of public funds, conduct an 
inquiry where it is satisfied that there is a reasonable cause so to do: 


Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the complainant 
has exhausted all available remedies with the National Sports Body or their affiliate 
units: 


Provided further that the Board may entertain such complaint if it is satisfied 
that accessing those remedies would result in unnecessary delay or unreasonable 
prejudice. 


0. (4) The Board may, either on its own motion, or on the receipt of a 
complaint by an aggrieved party, by order, suspend or cancel the Board recognition 
of a sports organisation as a National Sports Body or registration of an affiliate unit 
of a National Sports Body, in any of the following circumstances, namely:— 


(a) the international recognition of the concerned National Sports Body 
has been suspended or cancelled by the concerned International Sports Body; 


(b) the concerned affiliate unit has been suspended or disaffiliated by the 
concerned National Sports Body; 


(c) the National Sports Body has violated any of the provisions of this 
Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, including eligibility criteria 
or terms and conditions of the Board recognition; 


(d) the Registrar of Companies or the Registrar of Societies of the 
concemed sports organisation has reported gross irregularities in the internal 
functioning or removed the name of the National Sports Body or its affiliate 
units; 


(e) the National Sports Body or the affiliate unit has— 


(i) failed to hold elections for its Executive Committee or has 
committed gross irregularities in the election procedures thereof; or 


(ii) failed to publish its annual audited accounts; or 
(iii) has misused, misapplied or misappropriated any public funds: 


Provided that the suspension or disaffiliation referred to in clause (a) and 
clause (5) shall be co-terminus with the suspension or disaffiliation by the concerned 
International Sports Body or the National Sports Body, as the case may be, which 
may be extended by the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writing, for such further 
period as the Board may consider necessary. 


(2) Before issuing an order of suspension or cancellation of Board recognition 
or registration of the sports organisation under sub-section (/), the Board shall 
consult the concerned— 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) International Sports Body, where such suspension or cancellation of 
Board recognition concerns the National Sports Federation or the Regional 
Sports Federation; 


(b) National Sports Federation or the Regional Sports Federation, where 
such suspension or cancellation of registration concems any affiliate unit, 


and upon such consultation, take any of the following measures, namely:— 


(7) issue an order, directing the National Sports Body or its affiliate unit, 
to take such action as is appropriate to correct the deficiency and upon 
compliance, the Board may make a finding of compliance; or 


(ii) conduct a hearing by giving reasonable opportunity to the parties to 
present their case before pronouncing its decision. 


(3) An appeal against any order of the Board for suspension or cancellation of 
Board recognition or registration under this section shall lie with the Tribunal. 


I. (Z) In the event of loss of the international recognition of a National Sports 
Body, the normalisation process shall be implemented as per the International 
Charters and Statutes and the Board shall not interfere in such process. 


(2) In the absence of the normalisation process referred to in sub-section (/) 
on the loss of international recognition of a National Sports Body, or in the event of 
cancellation or suspension of Board recognition of a National Sports Body under 
section l0, where the loss of recognition concern— 


(a) a National Olympic Committee or a National Paralympic Committee, 
the Board may constitute an ad hoc administrative body in consultation with 
the International Olympic Committee or the International Paralympic 
Committee, as the case may be; 


(6) a National Sports Federation, the Board may, in consultation with the 
concerned International Federation, wherever applicable, direct the National 
Olympic Committee to constitute an ad hoc administrative body; 


(c) a Regional Sports Federation, the Board may in consultation with the 
concemed International Federation, if any, constitute an ad hoc administrative body. 


(3) In the event of cancellation or suspension of Board recognition or 
registration of an affiliate unit of a National Sports Body under section 0,— 


(a) where the cancellation or suspension of Board recognition or 
registration, concerns a State sports federation, the Board may direct the 
concerned National Sports Federation or the Regional Sports Federation; and 


(b) where the cancellation or suspension of Board recognition or 
registration, concerns a district sports federation, the Board may direct the 
concerned State sports federation, 


to constitute an ad hoc administrative body consisting of such members as may be 
determined by the Board in consultation with the National Sports Body or the 
concerned affiliate State unit, as the case may be. 


(4) The ad hoc administrative body shall be responsible for administering the 
concerned sports body or its affiliate units to ensure compliance with the provisions 
of this Act. 


(5) The ad hoc administrative body referred to in sub-section (2) shall consist 
of a maximum of five eminent sports administrators, who have previously held the 
office of a President or a Secretary General or a Treasurer of a National Sports Body 
or who is or has served as a member of the Executive Committee of the National 
Olympic Committee, having no past association with the sports discipline or any 
conflict of interest: 


Provided that no person shall be part of more than one ad hoc administrative 
body at the same time. 


Ad hoc 
administrative 
body. 


0 


Code of Ethics. 


Safe Sports 
Policy. 


Privileges of 
recognised 
sports 
organisation. 


Duties of 
recognised 
sports 
organisations. 


National Sports 
Election Panel 
and appointment 
of electoral 
officer. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CHAPTER V 
CODE OF ETHICS 
2. (/) Every National Sports Body shall formulate a Code of Ethics for the 
members of its Executive Committee and other committees, employees, staff, 


sponsors, coaches, athletes, officials, members, affiliates and such other relevant 
persons, in accordance with the guidelines specified by the Board. 


(2) The Code of Ethics shall establish minimum standards for the ethical and 
appropriate conduct of the persons specified in sub-section (/). 


(3) The Code of Ethics shall be framed in accordance with the Code of Ethics of 
the International Sports Bodies and in consonance with the applicable laws in India. 


(4) The Code of Ethics shall provide measures for protection of vulnerable 
persons against abuse by persons in positions of trust, responsibility or authority. 


Explanation —F or the purposes of this sub-section, “person in a position of 
trust” means any person who exercises authority, control or influence over another 
person, or a person on whom another person is dependent and who is connected or 
associated with the affairs of the National Sports Body. 


CHAPTER VI 
SAFE SPORTS POLICYAND GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 


3. () The Board shall frame a comprehensive Safe Sports Policy applicable 
to all activities, events, operations and proceedings conducted by the National Sports 
Bodies. 


(2) The Safe Sports Policy shall include provisions to ensure the protection 
and safety of women and minor athletes and such other persons as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) Every National Sports Body shall establish an internal grievance redressal 
mechanism to address the grievances raised by athletes, coaches and other 
individuals associated with such body, in a fair, timely and transparent manner. 


CHAPTER VII 
PRIVILEGES AND DUTIES OF RECOGNISED SPORTS ORGANISATION 
4. Only a recognised sports organisation shall be eligible to receive grants or 
any other financial assistance from the Central Government. 


45. (J) A recognised sports organisation shall ensure that all its voting 
members and affiliate units, as applicable, complies with— 


(a) the International Charters and Statutes, as applicable, and shall 
exercise the rights, perform the duties and discharge the functions as specified 
therein; and 


(6) the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 


(2) A recognised sports organisation shall be considered as a public authority 
under the Right to Information Act, 2005 with respect to the exercise of its functions, 
duties and powers under this Act. 


CHAPTER VIII 
NATIONAL SPORTS ELECTION PANEL 


6. (/) The Central Government shall, on the recommendations of the Board, 
notify a National Sports Election Panel consisting of such number of persons as it 
may deem necessary, who are retired Chief Election Commissioner or Election 
Commissioner or Deputy Election Commissioner or retired State Election 
Commissioner or Chief Electoral Officers of the States, with adequate experience of 
conduct of elections under the Representation of the People Act,l95]. 


[Part II— 


22 of 2005. 


43 of l95I. 


Sec. 2] 


43 of l95I. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) The persons notified under sub-section (/) shall act as electoral officers to 
oversee the conduct of free and fair elections to the Executive Committees and the 
Athletes Committee of the National Sports Bodies. 


(3) The Board shall maintain a roster of the National Sports Election Panel in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The fees and other allowances to be paid to the persons notified under 
sub-section (/) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The National Sports Bodies may appoint an electoral officer from the 
National Sports Election Panel to oversee its election process and ensure free and 
fair elections: 


Provided that where the Charter or Statutes of the International Sports Body 
require appointment of any other person as an electoral officer, the concerned 
National Sports Body may appoint such other person after furnishing the details, 
including qualifications and experience, of the person, to the Board. 


(6) Every National Sports Body, having affiliate units, shall prepare an 
Election Panel for the conduct of free and fair elections of the Executive Committees 
of their affiliate units, consisting of such number of retired persons as it may deem 
necessary, having adequate experience of conduct of elections under the 
Representation of the People Act, 95. 


(7) Every affiliate unit shall appoint an electoral officer from the roster to be 
maintained by the National Sports Body, to oversee its election process and ensure 
free and fair elections. 


CHAPTER Ix 
NATIONAL SPORTS TRIBUNAL 


7. (/) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National Sports 
Tribunal consisting of a chairperson and two other members, to provide for the 
independent, speedy, effective and cost-efficient disposal of sports related disputes. 


(2) The chairperson shall be a person who is or has been, a Judge of the 
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court. 


(3) The members shall be persons of eminence in public life with wide 
knowledge and experience in sports, public administration and law. 


(4) The chairperson and the other members of the Tribunal shall be appointed 
by the Central Government on the recommendations of a Search-cum-Selection 
Committee consisting of the following members, namely:— 


(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Supreme Court Judge recommended 
by the Chief Justice of India—chairperson; 


(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Law and 
Justice; 


(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Sports. 


(5) The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall determine the procedure for 
making its recommendations. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment, order or decree of 
any court, or in any law for the time being in force, the Search-cum-Selection 
Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for appointment to the post of 
chairperson or member, as the case may be, and the Central Government shall take 
a decision on the recommendations made by that Committee, preferably within three 
months from the date of such recommendation. 


(7) No appointment shall be invalid merely by reason of any vacancy or 
absence of a member in the Search-cum-Selection Committee. 


(8) The term of office and other conditions of service of chairperson and 
members of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Constitution of 
National Sports 
Tribunal. 


Removal of 
chairperson or 
members of 
Tribunal. 


Staff of 
Tribunal. 


Exclusion of 
jurisdiction of 
Tribunal. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(9) The Tribunal shall formulate its own procedure for the conduct of its 
business including the timelines to be followed for the disposal of matters. 


(/09) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed 
out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


8. (/) The Central Government shall remove from office a chairperson or 
member of the Tribunal who— 


(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; 


(6) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude; 


(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; 


(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his or her functions as a member; or 


(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office 
prejudicial to public interest: 


Provided that where the chairperson or member is proposed to be 
removed on any ground specified in clauses (c) to (e), he shall be informed of 
the charges against him and given an opportunity of being heard in respect of 
those charges. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), a member of the 
Tribunal shall not be removed from his office on the grounds specified therein unless 
the Chief Justice of India or his nominee judge, on a reference being made to him in 
this behalf by the Central Government, has on enquiry held in accordance with such 
procedure as he may specify in this behalf, recommended the removal. 


9. (J) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Tribunal, 
appoint such officers and other employees as may be necessary for discharging the 
functions of the Tribunal. 


(2) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their 
functions under the general superintendence and control of the chairperson or any 
other member of the Tribunal to whom powers for exercising such superintendence 
and control are delegated by the chairperson. 


(3) The qualifications, appointment, salary and allowances and other terms and 
conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


20. The Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction to adjudicate the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) any dispute, or conflict arising during the Olympic Games, 
Paralympic Games, Commonwealth Games, Asian Games, or any other 
similar events organised by any International Federations; 


(8) any dispute falling within the exclusive jurisdiction of — 


(i) the internal disputes resolution committee of a National Sports 
Body; or 


(ii) any other tribunal or court; or 
(iii) any International Federation; or 


(iv) the Court of Arbitration for Sports established in Lausanne, 
Switzerland; 


(c) doping related disputes, where Disciplinary Panels constituted under 
the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 have exclusive jurisdiction; 


(d) any matter in respect of which the International Charters and Statutes 
require the parties to submit to specific mechanism or forum for adjudication. 


[Part II— 


5 of 2022. 


Sec. 2] 


45 of 2023. 


5 of 908. 


47 of 2023. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


2. The members and other officers and employees of the Board or the 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


22. (/) All cases under civil jurisdiction falling within the scope of this Act, in 
which the National Sports Bodies are impleaded as parties and are pending before a 
District Court or High Court immediately before the constitution of the Tribunal, 
shall be transferred to the Tribunal on and from such date as may be specified by the 
Central Government. 


(2) The cases transferred to the Tribunal under sub-section (/) may be heard 
and adjudicated from the stage at which such dispute was pending in the concerned 
Court, or may be heard afresh if the Tribunal deems appropriate after recording the 
reasons therefor in writing. 


23. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter on which the Tribunal is empowered under this Act to 
determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in 
respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred on 
the Tribunal by or under this Act. 


24. (/) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions 
under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(6) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) calling for any public record or document or a copy of such record or 
document, from any office, subject to the provisions of sections !29 and 30 
of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
(f) reviewing its decisions; 
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte; 


(A) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or 
any order passed by it, ex parte; and 


(i) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


(2) Every proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 228, 229, 233, 257 and 267 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


(3) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purpose of 
section 25 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


25. (/) Unless the International Charters and Statutes provide for appeal before 
the Court of Arbitration for Sport, an appeal shall lie against any order of the 
Tribunal, not being an interlocutory order, to the Supreme Court. 


(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision made by the Tribunal with the 
consent of the parties. 


(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty 
days from the date of the decision appealed against: 


Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of 
the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in time. 


3 


Members, etc., to 
be public 
servants. 


Transfer of 
pending cases. 


Bar on 
jurisdiction of a 
civil court. 


Powers of 
Tribunal. 


Appeal to 
Supreme Court. 


l4 


Orders passed by 
Tribunal to be 
executable as a 
decree. 


Use of national 
names and 
insignia. 


Fund. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


26. (/) An order passed by the Tribunal under this Act shall be executable as 
a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the Tribunal shall have all the powers 
of a civil court. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), the Tribunal may 
transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil 
court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court. 


CHAPTER X 
USE OF NATIONAL NAMES AND INSIGNIA 


27. (/) Any sports organisation desirous of using the word “India” or “Indian” 
or “National” or any national insignia or symbols in any language in its registered 
name, operating name, logo or otherwise in its affairs, shall obtain a no-objection 
certificate from the Central Government for such use: 


Provided that a sports organisation other than a recognised sports organisation 
shall, in addition to the requirements under this sub-section, obtain written consent 
of the Board. 


(2) No sports organisation shall use the name “India” or the name of any State 
or district in India, or conduct any sports trials, tournaments, or events upon the 
suspension or cancellation of its recognition by the Board under this Act. 


(3) No person or group of persons, either individually or collectively, shall 
represent or be allowed to represent India or any State or district in India, in any 
sports trials, tournaments or events of designated sports without an authorisation by 
a National Sports Body or its affiliate unit. 


CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


28. (/) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Sports Board 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto— 


(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Board under this Act; and 


(b) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be 
decided upon by the Central Government. 


(2) The Fund constituted under sub-section (/) shall be applied for meeting— 


(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members 
of the Board and the administrative expenses including the salaries and 
allowances payable to or in respect of officers and other employees of the 
Board; and 


(6) all other expenses for meeting the objects and for the purposes 
authorised by this Act. 


29. (J) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person 
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall 
have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has, in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and 
papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Board. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central 
Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House 
of Parliament. 


30. (7) The Central Government in consonance with the International Charters 
and Statutes, may take such measures as may be prescribed, as it considers necessary 
for the promotion and development of sports, including in the public interest. 


(2) The measures referred to in sub-section (/), may include,— 


(a) the guiding principles for the conduct of elections by the National 
Sports Bodies, including model election rules; 


(b) the promotion of the welfare and interests of sportspersons; 
(c) the protection of the data and privacy of sportspersons; and 
(d) the appropriate use of technology and analytics in the context of sport. 


3. (/) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act: 


Provided that the Central Government, while making rules under this section, 
shall take into consideration the International Charters and Statutes, with the 
objective of ensuring transparency, accountability, and integrity in the management 
and administration of sports in India. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the relevant affiliations of Regional Sports Federation under 
sub-section (6) of section 3; 


(0) the sportspersons of outstanding merit and other categories of persons 
under the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (/) of section 4; 


(c) the mode of elections to different bodies, committees and offices 
including their term, eligibility criteria and disqualification of members 
thereof, and other matters of governance under sub-section (4) of section 4; 


(d) the composition and number of Members of the Board under 
sub-section (/) of section 5; 


(e) the composition of the search-cum-selection committee under 
sub-section (2) of section 5; 


(f) the salary and allowances, term of office of Chairperson and other 
Members of the Board and other terms and conditions of their service 
including removal from service, under sub-section (3) of section 5; 

(g) other places in which the Board shall establish its branch offices 
under sub-section (5) of section 5; 


(A) the measures to be taken by the Board for ensuring protection of the 
rights and welfare of athletes and support personnel under clause (7) of section 6; 


(7) other powers and functions of the Board under clause (7) of section 6; 


(j) the qualifications, appointment, salary and allowances and other terms 
and conditions of service of the employees and other officers of the Board 
under sub-section (3) of section 7; 


(k) the conditions and the manner in which affiliate units of the National 
Sports Bodies shall ensure registration of their affiliate units with the Board 
under sub-section (6) of section 8; 


(J) other persons to be covered by the Safe Sports Policy under 
sub-section (2) of section 3; 


I5 


Measures for 
promotion and 
development of 
sports. 


Power to make 
rules. 


l6 


Power to make 
regulations. 


Laying of rules, 
regulations and 
notifications. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(m) manner of maintaining roster of the National Sports Election Panel 
by the Board under sub-section (3) of section 6; 


(n) the fees and other allowances to be paid to the empanelled persons 
under sub-section (4) of section 6; 


(०) the term of office and other conditions of service of chairperson and 
members of Tribunal under sub-section (8) of section 7; 


(p) the qualifications, appointment, salary and allowances and other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees and other officers of the 
Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 9; 


(4) any other matter under clause (7) of sub-section (/) of section 24; 


(r) the form in which the Board shall prepare annual statement of 
accounts under sub-section (/) of section 29; 


(s) the measures to be taken by the Central Government for the 
promotion and development of sports under sub-section (/) of section 30; and 


(0) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed. 


32. (/) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act: 


Provided that the Board, while making regulations under this section, shall 
comply with the International Charter and Statutes, with the objective of ensuring 
transparency, accountability, and integrity in the management and administration of 
sports in India. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such regulations may make provision for— 


(a) the manner of maintaining register of the National Sports Bodies and 
their respective affiliate units by the Board under clause (b) of section 6; 


(b) the form, manner and particulars of application under sub-section (2) 
of section 8; 


(c) other criteria and conditions to be complied by the sports 
organisations under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 8; 


(d) the intervals and procedure for renewal of Board recognition under 
sub-section (4) of section 8; 


(e) the eligibility criteria for Board recognition of the sports organisation 
as a National Sports Promotion Organisation, the manner of their governance 
and functioning and the intervals and procedure for renewal of such 
recognition under sub-section (8) of section 8; and 


(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified by regulations 
under this Act. 


33. Every rule, regulation and every notification made or issued under this Act 
shall be laid as soon as may be, after it is made or issued, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, regulation or 
notification or both Houses agree that the rule, regulation or notification should not 
be made or issued, the rule, regulation or notification shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule, regulation or notification. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


34. (/) If the Central Government considers it necessary and expedient so to 
do in the public interest for the promotion of specific sport disciplines consistent 
with the spirit of good governance enshrined in the Olympic Charter, it may, in 
consultation with the Board and the concerned International Sports Body, by 
notification, direct that subject to such conditions and restrictions, if any, and for 
such period as may be specified in the notification, all or any of the provisions of 
this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder shall not apply to a National 
Sports Body or its affiliate unit specified therein. 


(2) The Central Government may, by notification, and for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, relax the eligibility criteria for the members of the Executive 
Committee, if such person is serving in the executive committee or a similar body 
of a corresponding International Sports Body or is in the General Body of the 
International Olympic Committee or International Paralympic Committee. 


35. (/) The Central Government may, from time to time, give such directions 
as it may think fit, to the Board or any other person or entity for the efficient 
administration of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government may, by an order, impose reasonable restrictions 
on the participation of any national team of a concermed sport in international sports 
competitions or participation of any individual in the activities of the national sports, 
under extraordinary circumstances and in the interest of national security, public 
order and safety. 


36. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any member 
of the Board or a National Sports Body or the Tribunal or any employee of such 
authorities or any other person or authority for anything which has been done or is 
intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 


37. (J) The National Sports Bodies shall primarily be guided by the 
International Charters and Statutes in the governance of its affairs. 


(2) In the event of any conflict between a provision of this Act and the 
International Charters and Statutes, the Central Government may, after consulting 
the Board and the concerned International Sports Body as may be deemed necessary, 
issue a clarificatory notification in this regard. 


38. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be 
necessary, for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of five years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


7 


Power to exempt 
in special cases. 


Power to issue 
directions and 
impose 
restrictions in 
national interest. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Conflicts with 
International 
Charters and 
Statutes. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


8 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The development of sports and related activities is a matter of national priority. 
It not only promotes active lifestyle, fitness among the children and youth but also 


social inclusiveness and cohesiveness, employment opportunities, peace and overall 
development, besides inculcating a sense of identity and pride. 


2. The National Sports Development Code of India, 20l] established good 
governance practices for sports bodies, essential for healthy development of sports 
in the country. It provided framework for recognition of sports organisations, 
including Indian Olympic Association, as sports bodies for the regulation of sports 
in India. However, there is a felt need for a comprehensive legislation to improve 
the governance of the sports bodies and achieve better results in sports and reduce 
the disputes and litigation, inter alia, involving sports federations. There is an 
imperative need to curb factionalism, and administrative interventions which 
adversely affects the organised development of sports and related activities in India 
and also for its better presentation before the international sports community. 


3. It is the endeavour of India to host major international sports events in the 
country and preparation for the same are underway. Also, as a part of the preparatory 
activities for the bidding of Summer Olympic Games 2036, it is imperative that the 
sports governance landscape undergoes a positive transformation to bring better 
outcomes, sporting excellence and aids in improved performance in major 
international competitions. 


4. In light of the above goals, the proposed legislation seeks to provide for the 
development and promotion of sports, welfare measures for sportspersons, ethical 
practices based on basic universal principles of good governance, ethics and fair 
play of the Olympic and sports movement, the Olympic Charter, the Paralympic 
Charter, international best practices and established legal standards and to provide 
for the resolution of sports grievances and sports disputes in a unified, equitable and 
effective manner. 


5. The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025, inter alia, seeks to provide for 
the following, namely:— 


(i) to provide for the establishment of the National Sports Governing 
Bodies such as the National Olympic Committee, the National Paralympic 
Committee, the National Sports Federation and the Regional Sports 
Federation, for the respective recognised sports organisations; 


(ii) to establish a National Sports Board which shall be responsible, 
inter alia, for granting Board recognition to the sports organisations as 
National Sports Governing Bodies and registration of their affiliates units; 


(iii) to provide for the National Sports Election Panel consisting of 
former members of the Election Commission of India or the State Election 
Commission or former Chief Electoral Officers of the States or Deputy 
Election Commissioners, who shall act as electoral officers to oversee the 
conduct of free and fair elections to the Executive Committees and the 
Athletes Committee of the National Sports Bodies; 


(iv) to provide for constitution of a National Sports Tribunal consisting 
of a chairperson and two other members, to provide for the independent, 
speedy, effective and cost-efficient disposal of sports related disputes; 


(v) to make provision for appeal to Supreme Court against any order of 
the Tribunal, unless the International Charters and Statutes provide for appeal 
before the Court of Arbitration for Sport; 


8 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(vi) to restrict the use of National name and insignia for any competition 
without obtaining necessary approval; 


(vii) to empower the Government of India to take necessary measures 
for the promotion and development of sports, in consonance with the 
International Charters and the Statutes, including in public interest; and to 
exempt any Sports body or their affiliate units from any of the provisions of 
the Bill or any rule or regulation made thereunder; 


(viii) to empower the Central Government to give such directions as it 
may think fit, to the Board or any other person or entity for the efficient 
administration of the legislation; 


(ix) to provide that the National Sports Bodies shall primarily be guided 
by the International Charters and Statutes in the governance of its affairs. 


6. The notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in 
the Bill. 


7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; DR. MANSUKH MANDAVITYA. 
The 4th July, 2025. 


9 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Notes on clauses 
Clause |.—This clause provides for the short title and commencement of the Bill. 


Clause 2.—This clause defines the various expressions used in the Bill, which, 
inter alia, includes, “ad hoc administrative body”, “affiliate unit”, “Athletes 
Committee”, “Board”, “Board recognition”, “designated sport”, “International 
Charters and Statutes”, “International Federation”, “International Olympic 
Committee”, “International Sports Body”, “National Sports Body”, etc. 


Clause 3.—This clause provides for establishment of national sports governing 
bodies, namely the National Olympic Committee, National Paralympic Committee, 
National Sports Federation and Regional Sports Federation for their respective 
recognised sports organisations. The national sports governing bodies shall maintain 
international recognition and affiliation from concerned international sports 
governing bodies. 


Clause 4.—This clause provides for compliance requirement relating to the 
structure and other requirements for National Sports Bodies to ensure they function 
in a fair and transparent manner, in alignment with the international statutes. It 
inter alia provides that every National Sports Body shall have a General Body 
consisting of equal number of representatives from each of its affiliate units 
provided that it shall have representation of Sportspersons of Outstanding merit, 
and, an Executive Committee having not more than |5 members, including at least 
two sportspersons of outstanding merit, two members from the Athlete Committee, 
and ex officio and other members. 


Clause 5—This clause provides for establishment of a National Sports Board. 
The Board shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of members as the 
Central Government may prescribe. The members of the Board shall be appointed 
by Central Government on recommendation of search-cum-selection committee 
composition of which shall be such, as the Central Government may prescribe. 


Clause 6.—This clause provides for the powers and functions of the National 
Sports Board, which, inter alia, include, to grant Board recognition to sports 
organisations and registration of affiliate units and to suspend or cancel such 
recognition or registration, maintain a register of the National Sports Bodies and 
each of their respective affiliate units, conduct inquiries, constitute an ad hoc 
administrative body or to direct the concerned National Sports Body or their affiliate 
units to constitute an ad hoc administrative body, issue guidelines for formulation 
of the Code of Ethics, frame Safe Sports Policy for the protection and safety of 
women, minor athletes and other classes of persons, maintain a roster of the National 
Sports Election Panel. 


Clause 7.—This clause provides that the Central Government shall in 
consultation with Board, appoint officers and employees of the Board for 
discharging functions of the Board, under the Bill. The qualification, appointment, 
salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officer and 
employee of the Board shall be such as the Central Government may prescribe. 


Clause 8.—This clause provides for the power of the National Sports Board 
to grant Board recognition to any sports organisation as a National Sports Body and 
the board recognition granted under this clause shall be renewed periodically. 


Clause 9.—This clause empowers the Board to conduct an inquiry, either on 
its own or in response to complaint received on matters affecting the welfare of 
sportspersons or the development of sports in the country or misuse of public funds. 


Clause |0.—This clause provides for the grounds on which Board shall either 
on its own or in response to complaint received shall exercise its power to suspend 
or cancel Board recognition of a National Sports Body or registration of an affiliate 
unit of a National Sports Body. It also provides that all appeals against order of the 
board under this clause shall lie with the Tribunal. 


20 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause ||.—This clause provides for the Board to constitute or direct to 
constitute ad hoc administrative body as part of normalization process in case of 
loss of international recognition or Board recognition of a National Sports Body or 
suspension or cancellation of registration of an affiliate unit of a National Sports 
Body. It also provides that the ad hoc administrative body shall consist of a 
maximum of five eminent sports administrators. 


Clause |2.—This clause provides for the Board to formulate guidelines for 
Code of Ethics establishing minimum standards for the ethical and appropriate 
conduct in National Sports Body. The guidelines for Code of Ethics shall be in 
alignment with Code of Ethics of international sports bodies. 


Clause |3.—This clause provides to frame a comprehensive Safe Sports 
Policy by the Board to ensure the protection and safety of women, minor athletes 
and other persons. 


Clause |4.—This clause provides that only a recognised sports organisation 
shall be eligible to receive grants or any other financial assistance from the Central 
Government. 


Clause 5.—This clause seeks to lay down the duties of recognised sports 
organisations and it also provides that a recognised sports organisation shall be 
considered as a Public Authority under the Right to Information Act, 2005 with 
respect to the exercise of its functions, duties and powers under the Bill. 


Clause 6—This clause provides for National Sports Election Panel and 
appointment of electoral officer. The panel shall consist of such number of persons, 
as may be deemed necessary, with experience in conducting of elections. It also 
provides that the Board shall maintain a roster of the National Sports Election Panel. 
Further, the fees and other allowances of persons on National Sports Election Panel 
shall be as the Central Government may prescribe. 


Clause |7.—This clause provides for the Central Government to constitute, 
by notification, a National Sports Tribunal, which shall adjudicate upon sports 
related disputes. The Tribunal shall consist of a chairperson and two other members. 
The chairperson and the members of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendations of a search-cum-selection committee. The 
Tribunal shall formulate its own procedure for the conduct of its business including 
the timelines to be followed for the disposal of matters and all expenses incurred in 
connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


Clause 8.—This clause lay down grounds for removal of chairperson or 
members of Tribunal. 


Clause |9.—This clause provides for appointment of officers and other 
employees for the Tribunal and provides to lay down qualifications, appointment, 
salary and allowances and other terms and conditions for appointment. 


Clause 20.—This clause provides those matters, where the Tribunal shall not 
have jurisdiction to adjudicate. 


Clause 2\.—This clause provides that the members and other officers and 
employees of the Board or the Tribunal, shall be deemed to be public servants within 
the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


Clause 22.—This clause provides for immediate transfer of all cases to the 
Tribunal in which National Sports Bodies are impleaded and are pending before a 
District Court or High Court. 


Clause 23.—This clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter on which the Tribunal is 
empowered under the Bill. 


2] 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 24.—This clause provides that for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under the Bill, the Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a 
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908. 


Clause 25.—This clause provides that unless the International Charters and 
Statutes provide for appeal before the Court of Arbitration for Sport, an appeal 
against any order of the Tribunal shall lie with the Supreme Court. 


Clause 26.—This clause provides that an order passed by the Tribunal under 
this Bill shall be executable as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the 
Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court. 


Clause 27.—This clause, inter alia, provides that any sports organisation, 
desirous of using the word “India” or “Indian” or “National” or any national insignia 
or symbols in any language in its registered name, operating name, logo or otherwise 
in its affairs, shall obtain a no-objection certificate from the Central Government for 
such use. 


Clause 28.—This clause seeks to constitute National Sports Board Fund and 
it shall be credited thereto with all grants, fees and charges and all sums received by 
the Board and the funds shall be applied for meeting salaries and allowances payable 
to Chairpersons, members and officers and other employees of the Board and meet 
all other expenses for the purposes authorised under the Bill. 


Clause 29.—This clause provides for maintenance of proper accounts and 
other relevant records by the Board which shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him. The accounts and 
audit report of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India or any other person appointed by him, shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government and the Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 


Clause 30.—This clause provides for measures which may be taken by the 
Central Government in consonance with the International Charters for the 
promotion and development of sports, including in the public interest. 


Clause 3|.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make 
rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 32.—This clause seeks to empower the National Sports Board to make 
regulations to carry out the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 33.—This clause seeks to require that rules and regulations made under 
the Bill are to be laid before the Parliament. 


Clause 34.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
exempt, by notification, all or any of the provisions of this Bill or any rule or 
regulation made thereunder from applying upon a National Sports Body or its 
affiliate unit specified therein. It also empowers the Central Government to relax 
the eligibility criteria for the members of the Executive Committee, subject to 
conditions as specified under the Bill. 


Clause 35.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to give 
directions and impose reasonable restrictions in interest of national security, safety 
and public order. 


Clause 36.—This clause provides that no suit, prosecution or legal proceeding 
shall lie against any member of the Board or a National Sports Body or the Tribunal 
or any employee of such authorities or any other person or authority for anything 
which has been done or is intended to be done in good faith, under the provisions of 
the Bill. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 37.—This clause provides that the National Sports Bodies shall 
primarily be guided by the International Charters and Statutes in the governance of 
its affairs and in the event of conflict between a provision of the Bill and the 
International Charters and Statutes, the Central Government may, after consulting 
the Board and the concerned International Sports Body, if deemed necessary, issue 
a clarificatory notification in this regard. 


Clause 38.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to issue 
an order, for removal of any difficulty arises during implementation of the Bill, and 
such orders to be laid before House of Parliament. No orders under this clause shall 
be passed after expiry of a period of five years from the date of commencement of 
the Bill. 


23 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 (/) provides for establishment of National Sports Board and clause |7(/) 
provides for constitution of National Sports Tribunal. 


2. Clause 7 (/0) provides that all expenses incurred in connection with the 
Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


3. Clause 28 provides for constitution of the National Sports Board Fund in 
which all grants, fees and charges received by the Board and all sums received by 
the Board from such other sources as may be decided upon by the Central 
Government will be credited. The Fund constituted shall be applied for meeting the 
salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and Members of the Board and 
the administrative expenses including the salaries and allowances payable to or in 
respect of officers and other employees of the Board; and all other expenses for 
meeting the objects and for the purposes authorised by the Bill. 


4. Keeping in view the setting up of the National Sports Board and the 
National Sports Tribunal, initially rupees ten crores will be required for salaries of 
the members of the Board and Tribunal and other staff to be recruited during the 
first financial year. Expenditure on the National Sports Board and the National 
Sports Tribunal will be further revised as per their composition and other 
requirements. As the expenditure would depend upon the composition of the 
National Sports Board and National Sports Tribunal and the staff to be recruited for 
both the bodies, recurring or non-recurring expenditure cannot be anticipated at this 
stage. 


5. The provisions of the Bill, if enacted, would involve recurring and 
non-recurring expenditure out of the Consolidated Fund of India. The aforesaid 
expenditure to be incurred, would be met from budgetary allocation after such 
allocation by the Department of Expenditure, as and when the Board and Tribunal 
will be established and constituted, respectively. This expenditure is not quantifiable 
at this stage as the structure, posts, number of officers and other aspects are not final. 


24 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the 
matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters include— 


(i) the relevant affiliations of Regional Sports Federation under 
sub-clause (6) of clause 3; (i) the sportspersons of outstanding merit and other 
categories of persons under the proviso to sub-clause (/)(a) of clause 4; (77) 
the mode of elections to different bodies, committees and offices including 
their term, eligibility criteria and disqualification of members thereof, and 
other matters of governance under sub-clause (4) of clause 4; (iv) the 
composition and number of Members of the Board under sub-clause (/) of 
clause 5; (v) the composition of the search-cum-selection committee under 
sub-clause (2) of clause 5; (vi) the salary and allowances, term of office of 
Chairperson and other Members of the Board and other terms and conditions 
of their service, including removal from service under sub-clause (3) of 
clause 5; (vit) other places in which the Board shall establish its branch offices 
under sub-clause (5) of clause 5; (viii) the measures to be taken by the Board 
for ensuring protection of the rights and welfare of athletes and support 
personnel under clause 6 (i); (ix) other powers and functions of the Board 
under clause 6 (/); (x) the qualifications, appointment, salary and allowances 
and other terms and conditions of service of the employees and other officers 
of the Board under sub-clause (3) of clause 7; (xi) the conditions and the 
manner in which affiliate units of the National Sports Bodies shall ensure 
registration with the Board under sub-clause (6) of clause 8; (xii) other persons 
to be covered by the Safe Sports Policy under sub-clause (2) of clause 3; (xii) 
manner of maintaining roster of the National Sports Election Panel by the 
Board under sub-clause (3) of clause 6; (xiv) the fees and other allowances 
to be paid to the empanelled persons under sub-clause (4) of clause 6; (xv) 
the term of office and other conditions of service of chairperson and members 
of Tribunal under sub-clause (8) of clause l7; (xvi) the qualifications, 
appointment, salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service 
of the employees and other officers of the Tribunal under sub-clause (3) of 
clause 9; (xvii) any other matter in respect of which the Tribunal may exercise 
the powers of a civil court under sub-clause (/) (7) of clause 24; (xviii) the 
form in which the Board shall prepare annual statement of accounts under 
sub-clause (/) of clause 29; (xix) the measures to be taken by the Central 
Government for the promotion and development of sports under 
sub-clause (/) of clause 30; and (xx) any other matter which is to be, or may 
be prescribed under the Bill. 


2. Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the National Sports Board, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, to make regulations. Sub-clause (2) of the said 
clause specifies the matters in respect of which regulations may be made. These 
matters include— 


(7) the manner of maintaining register of the National Sports Bodies and 
their respective affiliate units by the Board under clause 6 (0); (४) the form, 
manner and particulars, of application under sub-clause (2) of clause 8; (iii) 
other criteria and conditions to be complied by the sports organisations under 
sub-clause (3)(d) of clause 8; (iv) the intervals and procedure for renewal of 
Board recognition under sub-clause (4) of clause 8; (v) the eligibility criteria 
for Board recognition of a sports organisation as a National Sports Promotion 
Organisation, the manner of their governance and functioning and the intervals 
and procedure for renewal of such recognition under sub-clause (8) of 
clause 8; and (vi) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified by 
regulations. 


25 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


3. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules and regulations 
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative details, and as such, it is 
not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
powers is, therefore, of a normal character. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


LOK SABHA 


CORRIGENDA 
to 
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 
[To be/ As introduced in Lok Sabha| 


S. No. Page No. Line(s) No. For Read 
l. Page (ii), Against “organisations” “organisation” 
in the Clause 5 
Arrangement 
of Clauses 
2. Page (ii), Against “officer” “officers” 
in the Clause 6 
Arrangement 
of Clauses 
3५ 2 37 “(i)” “(A)” 
4. 2 39 “(ii)” “(BY)” 
5, 3 l “(iii)” “Cy 
_ =) 6 “of the concerned “who” 
National Sports 
Body” 
ig 5 l7 “who shall be “responsible” 
responsible” 
a : 7 47 “Organisations” “Organisation” 
a L 6 “their affiliate” “its affiliate” 
0. पु In the “Power of Board to “Power of Board 
marginal suspend or cancel to suspend or 
heading Board recognition.” cancel Board 
against clause recognition or 
no.l0 registration.” 
l]. ra 47 “registration of the “registration” 
sports organisation” 
2. 0 2 “by persons in “by person ina 
positions of trust,” position of trust,” 
3. 0 In the “Duties of recognised “Duties of 
marginal sports organisations” | recognised sports 
heading organisation” 
against clause 
no.l5 
4. 0 In the “National Sports “National Sports 
marginal Election Panel and | Election Panel and 
heading appointment of appointment of 
against clause electoral officer” electoral officers” 
no.l6 


P.T.O. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 
S. No. Page No. Line(s) No. For Read 
I5. l] ll “Charter” “Charters” 
6. ll 38 “Justice” “Justice — 
member” 
7. l] 39 “Sports” “Sports — member” 
8. 2 2 “his or her functions” “his functions” 
9. 2 22 “has on enquiry” “has on inquiry” 
20. 5 27 “elections” “election” 
2I. 5 43 “service of the “service of the 
employees and other officers and the 
officers” other employees” 
22. 6 जि) “service of the “service of the 
employees and other officers and the 
officers” other employees” 
23. 6 20 “Charter” “Charters” 
24. 7 22 “any member” “any Member” 
25. [7 23 “Board or” “Board or member 
of” 
26. [7 23 “any employee” “any officer or 
other employee” 
27. 8 39 “Election Commission “Election 
of India” Commission of 
India or Deputy 
Election 
Commissioners” 
28. 8 40 “the States or Deputy” “the States,” 
29. 8 4] “Election “who shall act” 
Commssioners, who 
shall act” 
30. 8 45 “to provide for the “for the 
independent,” independent,” 
NEW DELHI; 


July 27,2025 __ 
Ashadha 30, 947 (Saka) 


Sec. 2] 


5 of 2022. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Britt No. 77 oF 2025 


A Bill to amend the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


l. (7) This Act may be called the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. Section 2 of the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 (hereinafter referred to as 
the principal Act) shall be numbered as sub-section (/) thereof and in 
sub-section (/) as so numbered,— 


29 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(aa) “Anti-Doping Organisation” means the World Anti-Doping 
Agency or a signatory to the Code which is responsible for adopting 
rules for initiating, implementing or enforcing any part of the doping 
control process and includes the International Olympic Committee, the 
International Paralympic Committee, other major event organisations 
that conduct testing at their events, International Federations, and the 
National Anti-Doping Organisations;’; 


(ii) in clause (0), after the word and figure “section 47, the words “or as 
detailed under the Code as set out in the Schedule” shall be inserted; 


(iii) in clause (e), for the words “or such other person”, the words 
# parent or any other person” shall be substituted; 


(iv) in clause (),— 


(a) for the words “up to the disposal”, the words “till the final 
disposal” shall be substituted; 


(b) after the words “Anti-Doping Rule Violation”, the words “or 
violation of the prohibition of participation during ineligibility or 
provisional suspension” shall be inserted; 


(v) for clause (q), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(q) “in-competition” means the period commencing at 
:59 p.m. on the day before a competition in which the athlete is 
scheduled to participate till the end of such competition and the sample 
collection process related to such competition;’; 


(vi) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(sa) “marker” means a compound, group of compounds or 
biological variable that indicates the use of a prohibited substance or a 
prohibited method;’; 


(vii) after clause (7), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


‘(ta) “metabolite”? means any substance produced by a 
biotransformation process;’; 


(viii) clause (w) shall be omitted; 
(ix) for clause (x), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(x) “out-of-competition” means any period which is not 
in-competition;’; 
(x) in clause (zc), after the words “any substance”, the words “or class 
of substances” shall be inserted; 
(xi) in clause (zg), the words “and testing of samples” shall be omitted; 


(xii) after sub-section (/) as so numbered, the following sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined 
but defined in the Code shall have the same meanings respectively 
assigned to them in that Code.”. 


Insertion of new 3. After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, 
section 2A. namely:— 

Application of “2A. (J) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
World | other law, such of the provisions of the World Anti-Doping Code as are set 
a USpae out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India. 


Code. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any 
amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said Code set 
out therein. 


(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament.”. 


4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“4. Any one or more of the following circumstances or acts or 
conducts shall constitute Anti-Doping Rule Violation for the purposes of this 
Act, namely:— 


(a) the presence of a prohibited substance or its metabolites or 
markers in an athlete’s sample, unless such presence is exempted under 
section 5; 


(6) use or attempted use by an athlete of any prohibited substance 
or any prohibited method, unless such use is exempted under section 5; 


(c) evading sample collection; or refusing or failing to submit to 
sample collection without compelling justification after notification by 
a duly authorised person; 


(d) whereabouts failures by an athlete as specified in the Code; 


(e) tampering or attempted tampering with any part of doping 
control by an athlete or other person; 


(f) possession of any prohibited substance or any prohibited 
method by an athlete or athlete support personnel, unless such 
possession is exempted under section 5; 


(g) trafficking or attempted trafficking in any prohibited 
substance or prohibited method by an athlete or other person; 


(A) administration or attempted administration by an athlete or 
other person to any athlete in-competition of any prohibited substance 
or prohibited method, or administration or attempted administration to 
any athlete out-of-competition of any prohibited substance or any 
prohibited method that is prohibited out-of-competition; 


(i) assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering 
up or any other type of intentional complicity or attempted complicity 
involving an Anti-Doping Rule Violation, attempted Anti-Doping Rule 
Violation or violation of the prohibition against participation during 
ineligibility or provisional suspension by any other person; 

(j) prohibited association by an athlete or other person as the 
Agency may specify by regulations; 

(k) acts by an athlete or other person to discourage or retaliate 
against reporting to authorities.”. 


5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the words 
“individual athlete or athlete support personnel”, the words “athlete or other 
person” shall be substituted. 


6. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after the words 
“International Federation”, the words “, National Olympic Committee, National 
Paralympic Committee” shall be inserted. 


7. In section 0 of the principal Act, sub-section (5) shall be omitted. 


हट 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 4. 
Anti-Doping Rule 
Violation. 


Amendment of 
section 6. 


Amendment of 
section 7. 


Amendment of 
section l0. 


32 


Amendment of 
section |]. 


Amendment of 
section |2. 


Amendment of 
section |4. 


Amendment of 
section l6. 


Amendment of 
section |7. 


Amendment of 
section 9. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 20. 
Power of 
collecting 
samples and 
testing. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 2]. 


Result 
Management 
process. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


8. In section |] of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (4), after the 
words “who are’, the words “or have been” shall be inserted. 


9. In section |2 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words “Central 
Government” shall be substituted; 


(6) for the words “specified by regulations”, wherever they occur, the 
word “prescribed” shall be substituted. 


0. In section 4 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(7) The Director General or any other staff member of the Agency 
shall have operational independence from any National Sports Federation, 
International Federation, National Olympic Committee, National Paralympic 
Committee or any Government department or agency with responsibility for 
sport or anti-doping.”. 

Il. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),— 
(a) for clause (7), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(@) coordinating and cooperating with the Anti-Doping 
Organisations and National Sports Federations;”; 


(5) in clause (A), the word “Other” shall be omitted. 


2. In section ॥7 of the principal Act, for the words “Therapeutic 
Exemption”, the words “Therapeutic Use Exemption” shall be substituted. 


3. In section 9 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, !973”, the words and figures “the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 


4. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“20. Notwithstanding the power of the Agency to direct the collection 
of samples of an athlete at any time and at any place, if the Agency has 
reasons to believe that an athlete has committed an Anti-Doping Rule 
Violation, it shall require such athlete to submit samples for testing, in 
accordance with such procedure and in such manner, as may be specified by 
regulations.”. 


5. For section 2] of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“2], (/) After receiving an adverse report from a dope testing laboratory 
indicating presence of any prohibited substance or its metabolites or markers in the 
sample of an athlete or evidence of the use of a prohibited method, the Agency 
shall carry out initial examination of the report in such manner as may be specified 
by regulations and verify, if Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to such 
athlete in respect of such substance or if there has been any departure from the 
International Standard for Laboratories or International Standard for Testing and 
Investigations that may have caused the adverse analytical finding or if it is 
apparent that the adverse analytical finding was caused by an ingestion of the 
relevant prohibited substance through a permitted route. 


(2) Where, after examination and verification under sub-section (/), the 
Agency is satisfied that no Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to 
the athlete and that there has been no departure from the International 
Standard for Laboratories or International Standard for Testing and 
Investigations that may have caused the adverse analytical finding or that the 
adverse analytical finding was not caused by an ingestion of the relevant 
prohibited substance through a permitted route, it shall take such actions in 
such manner, as may be specified by regulations.”. 


[Part II— 


2 of 974. 
46 of 2023. 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


6. In section 23 of the principal Act,— 


(a) for the words “specified by regulations”, wherever they occur, the 
word “prescribed” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (2), for the words “regulations as may be made by the 
Board”, the words “rules as may be made by the Central Government” shall 
be substituted; 


(c) for sub-section (9) and the Explanation, the following sub-sections 
and Explanation shall be substituted, namely:— 


‘(9) The World Anti-Doping Agency, the International Olympic 
Committee, the International Paralympic Committee and the concerned 
International Federation may prefer an appeal against the decision of 
the Appeal Panel to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, in accordance 
with the rules of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and the Code. 


(/0) Where the case involves international level athlete or 
international events,— 


(a) such athlete or other person who is subject to the 
decision being appealed; 


(b) the National Anti-Doping Agency; 
(c) the International Federation; 
(d) the World Anti-Doping Agency; and 


(e) the International Olympic Committee or the 
International Paralympic Committee, as the case may be, where 
the decision may have an effect in relation to the Olympic Games 
or the Paralympic Games including decisions affecting eligibility 
for the Olympic Games or the Paralympic Games, 


may appeal against the decision of the Disciplinary Panel to the Court 
of Arbitration for Sport. 


(//) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (/) to 
(J0), in cases where the World Anti-Doping Agency has a right to 
appeal under Article l3 of the Code and no appeal has been filed by 
any party against the final decision of the Agency, the World 
Anti-Doping Agency may appeal against such decision to the Court of 
Arbitration for Sport without exhausting other remedies provided under 
this Act and the rules made thereunder. 


Explanation—For the purposes of sub-sections (9) to (//), 
“Court of Arbitration for Sport” means an international body 
established in 984 to settle disputes related to sport through arbitration 
whose headquarter is in Lausanne, Switzerland.’. 


7. In section 24 of the principal Act, after the word “Board,”, the words 


“ Appeal Panel,” shall be inserted. 


8. In section 26 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the words “may, if required,”, 
the word “shall” shall be substituted; 


(6) in sub-section (4), in clause (d), after the words “standard operative 
procedures”, the words “, subject to the International Standard for 
Laboratories” shall be inserted. 


9. In section 29 of the principal Act,— 


(i) after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


33 


Amendment of 
section 23. 


Amendment of 
section 24. 


Amendment of 
section 26. 


Amendment of 
section 29. 


34 


Amendment of 
section 30. 


Amendment of 
section 3]. 


Insertion of 
Schedule. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


“(ca) the manner of constituting the Appeal Panel under 
sub-section (/) of section 2; 


(cb) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson, 
Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Appeal Panel and the 
conditions subject to which such appointments shall be made under 
sub-section (3) of section 2; 


(cc) the grounds on which a member of the Appeal Panel may be 
removed under sub-section (4) of section 2;”; 


(ii) after clause (7), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(fa) the other decisions against which an appeal may be filed, 
and the form and manner in which and the time within which such 
appeal may be filed under sub-section (/) of section 23; 


(fb) the procedure to be followed by the Appeal Panel under 
sub-section (2) of section 23; 


(fc) the manner of communicating the decision of the Appeal 
Panel under sub-section (8) of section 23;”; 


(iii) in clause (m), after the word and figures “section 26”, the words 
“* subject to the International Standard for Laboratories” shall be inserted. 


20. In section 30 of the principal Act,— 
(i) clauses (e), (f) and (g) shall be omitted; 
(ii) clauses (0), (m) and (7) shall be omitted. 
2. In section 3] of the principal Act,— 
(a) in sub-section (/),— 


(7) in the opening portion, for the words “for complying with the 
requirements of international obligations and commitments including the 
Code”, the words “in compliance with the international obligations and the 
Code, including its International Standards,” shall be substituted; 


(ii) in clause (/), for the words “anti-doping control”, the words 
“doping control” shall be substituted; 


(iii) in clause (m), the word “other” shall be omitted; 
(b) in sub-section (2),— 
(४) clause (b) shall be omitted; 
(ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted, 
namely:— 
“(c) the prohibited association by an athlete or other person 
under clause (7) of section 4;”; 
(iii) clause (d) shall be omitted. 
22. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be 
inserted, namely:— 
“THE SCHEDULE 
(See section 2A) 


PROVISIONS OF THE WORLD ANTI-DOPING CODE, WHICH SHALL HAVE 
FORCE OF LAW 
ARTICLE 2 ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLATIONS 


The purpose of Article 2 is to specify the circumstances and conduct which 
constitute anti-doping rule violations. Hearings in doping cases will proceed 
based on the assertion that one or more of these specific rules have been violated. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Athletes or other Persons shall be responsible for knowing what constitutes 
an anti-doping rule violation and the substances and methods which have 
been included on the Prohibited List. 


The following constitute anti-doping rule violations: 


2. Presence of a Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in 


2.2 


an Athlete’s Sample 


2.l. It is the Athletes’ personal duty to ensure that no Prohibited 
Substance enters their bodies. Athletes are responsible for any 
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers found to be 
present in their Samples. Accordingly, it is not necessary that 
intent, Fault, Negligence or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be 
demonstrated in order to establish an anti-doping rule violation 
under Article 2.l. 7 


7 [Comment to Article 2./.7. An anti-doping rule violation is 
committed under this Article without regard to an Athlete’s Fault. This 
rule has been referred to in various CAS decisions as “Strict 
Liability”. An Athlete’s Fault is taken into consideration in 
determining the Consequences of this anti-doping rule violation under 
Article /0. This principle has consistently been upheld by CAS.] 


2..2 Sufficient proof of an anti-doping rule violation under Article 2.] 
is established by any of the following: presence of a Prohibited 
Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in the Athlete’s A 
Sample where the Athlete waives analysis of the B Sample and 
the B Sample is not analyzed; or, where the Athlete’s B Sample is 
analyzed and the analysis of the Athlete’s B Sample confirms the 
presence of the Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or 
Markers found in the Athlete’s A Sample; or where the Athlete’s 
A or B Sample is split into two parts and the analysis of the 
confirmation part of the split Sample confirms the presence of the 
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers found in the 
first part of the split Sample or the Athlete waives analysis of the 
confirmation part of the split Sample. ° 


8 [Comment to Article 2./.2. The Anti-Doping Organization with 
Results Management responsibility may, at its discretion, choose 
to have the B Sample analyzed even if the Athlete does not request 
the analysis of the B Sample. | 


2..3 Excepting those substances for which a Decision Limit is 
specifically identified in the Prohibited List or a Technical 
Document, the presence of any reported quantity of a Prohibited 
Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in an Athlete’s Sample 
shall constitute an anti-doping rule violation. 


2..4 As an exception to the general rule of Article 2., the Prohibited 
List, International Standards, or Technical Documents may 
establish special criteria for reporting or the evaluation of certain 
Prohibited Substances. 


Use or Attempted Use by an Athlete of a Prohibited Substance or a 
Prohibited Method ? 


9 [Comment to Article 2.2: It has always been the case that Use or 
Attempted Use of a Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method may 
be established by any reliable means. As noted in the Comment to 
Article 3.2, unlike the proof required to establish an anti-doping rule 
violation under Article 2./, Use or Attempted Use may also be 
established by other reliable means such as admissions by the Athlete, 


35 


36 


2.3 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


witness statements, documentary evidence, conclusions drawn from 
longitudinal profiling, including data collected as part of the Athlete 
Biological Passport, or other analytical information which does not 
otherwise satisfy all the requirements to establish “Presence” of a 
Prohibited Substance under Article 2.7. For example, Use may be 
established based upon reliable analytical data from the analysis of an 
A Sample (without confirmation from an analysis of a B Sample) or 
from the analysis of a B Sample alone where the Anti-Doping 
Organization provides a satisfactory explanation for the lack of 
confirmation in the other Sample. | 


2.2.! It is the Athletes’ personal duty to ensure that no Prohibited 
Substance enters their bodies and that no Prohibited Method is 
Used. Accordingly, it is not necessary that intent, Fault, 
Negligence or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be demonstrated 
in order to establish an anti-doping rule violation for Use of a 
Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method. 


2.2.2 The success or failure of the Use or Attempted Use of a 
Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method is not material. It is 
sufficient that the Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method was 
Used or Attempted to be Used for an anti-doping rule violation to 
be committed.!° 


0 [Comment to Article 2.2.2: Demonstrating the “Attempted Use” 
of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method requires proof of 
intent on the Athlete’s part. The fact that intent may be required to 
prove this particular anti-doping rule violation does not undermine 
the Strict Liability principle established for violations of Article 2. / 
and violations of Article 2.2 in respect of Use of a Prohibited 
Substance or Prohibited Method. An Athlete’s Use of a Prohibited 
Substance constitutes an anti-doping rule violation unless such 
Substance is not prohibited Out-of-Competition and the Athlete’s 
Use takes place Out-of-Competition. (However, the presence of a 
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in a Sample 
collected In-Competition is a violation of Article 2.] regardless of 
when that Substance might have been administered.) | 


Evading, Refusing or Failing to Submit to Sample Collection by an 
Athlete 


Evading Sample collection; or refusing or failing to submit to Sample 
collection without compelling justification after notification by a duly 
authorized Person. !! 


l] [Comment to Article 2.3: For example, it would be an anti-doping 
rule violation of “evading Sample collection” if it were established that 
an Athlete was deliberately avoiding a Doping Control official to evade 
notification or Testing. A violation of “failing to submit to Sample 
collection” may be based on either intentional or negligent conduct of 
the Athlete, while “evading” or “refusing” Sample collection 
contemplates intentional conduct by the Athlete. ] 


2.4 Whereabouts Failures by an Athlete 


2.5 


2.6 


Any combination of three missed tests and/or filing failures, as defined 
in the International Standard for Results Management, within a 
twelve-month period by an Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool. 
Tampering or Attempted Tampering with any Part of Doping Control 
by an Athlete or Other Person 

Possession of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method by an 
Athlete or Athlete Support Person 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


2.6.] Possession by an Athlete In-Competition of any Prohibited Substance 
or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by an Athlete 
Out-of-Competition of any Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited 
Method which is prohibited Out-of-Competition unless the Athlete 
establishes that the Possession is consistent with a Therapeutic Use 
Exemption (“TUE”) granted in accordance with Article 4.4 or other 
acceptable justification. !” 


l2 [Comment to Articles 2.6./ and 2.6.2: Acceptable justification 
would not include, for example, buying or Possessing a 
Prohibited Substance for purposes of giving it to a friend or 
relative, except under justifiable medical circumstances where 
that Person had a physician’s prescription, e.g., buying Insulin 
for a diabetic child. | 


2.6.2 Possession by an Athlete Support Person In-Competition of any 
Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by 
an Athlete Support Person Out-of-Competition of any Prohibited 
Substance or any Prohibited Method which is_ prohibited 
Out-of-Competition in connection with an Athlete, Competition 
or training, unless the Athlete Support Person establishes that the 
Possession is consistent with a TUE granted to an Athlete in 
accordance with Article 4.4 or other acceptable justification." 


l3[Comment to Articles 2.6.] and 2.6.2: Acceptable justification 
may include, for example, (a) an Athlete or a team doctor 
carrying Prohibited Substances or Prohibited Methods for 
dealing with acute and emergency situations (e.g., an epinephrine 
auto-injector), or (b) an Athlete Possessing a Prohibited 
Substance or Prohibited Method for therapeutic reasons shortly 
prior to applying for and receiving a determination on a TUE. ] 


2.7 Trafficking or Attempted Trafficking in any Prohibited Substance 


2.8 


or Prohibited Method by an Athlete or Other Person 


Administration or Attempted Administration by an Athlete or 
Other Person to any Athlete In-Competition of any Prohibited 
Substance or Prohibited Method, or Administration or Attempted 
Administration to any Athlete Out-of-Competition of any 
Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited Method that is Prohibited 
Out-of-Competition 


2.9 Complicity or Attempted Complicity by an Athlete or Other Person 


Assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering up or any 
other type of intentional complicity or Attempted complicity involving 
an anti-doping rule violation, Attempted anti-doping rule violation or 
violation of Articlel0.4.l by another Person.'4 


4 [Comment to Article 2.9: Complicity or Attempted Complicity may 
include either physical or psychological assistance. | 


2.0 Prohibited Association by an Athlete or Other Person 


2.0.l Association by an Athlete or other Person subject to the 
authority of an Anti-Doping Organization in a professional or 
sport-related capacity with any Athlete Support Person who: 


2.0.l.l If subject to the authority of an Anti-Doping 
Organization, is serving a period of Ineligibility; or 


2.0..2 If not subject to the authority of an Anti-Doping 
Organization, and where Ineligibility has not been addressed 
in a Results Management process pursuant to the Code, has 


37 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part H— 


been convicted or found in a criminal, disciplinary or 
professional proceeding to have engaged in conduct 
which would have constituted a violation of anti-doping 
rules if Code-compliant rules had been applicable to such 
Person. The disqualifying status of such Person shall be in 
force for the longer of six (6) years from the criminal, 
professional or disciplinary decision or the duration of the 
criminal, disciplinary or professional sanction imposed; or 


2.0..3 Is serving as a front or intermediary for an individual 
described in Article 2.0.l.l or 2.0..2. 


2.0.2 To establish a violation of Article 2.0, an Anti-Doping 
Organization must establish that the Athlete or other Person 
knew of the Athlete Support Person’s disqualifying status. 


The burden shall be on the Athlete or other Person to establish 
that any association with an Athlete Support Person described 
in Article 2.0.l.l or 2.0.I.2 is not in a professional or 
sport-related capacity and/or that such association could not 
have been reasonably avoided. 


Anti-Doping Organizations that are aware of Athlete Support 
Personnel who meet the criteria described in Article 2.0..], 
2.0..2, or 2.0..3 shall submit that information to WADA. 7 


l5 [Comment to Article 2./9- Athletes and other Persons must 
not work with coaches, trainers, physicians or other Athlete 
Support Personnel who are Ineligible on account of an 
anti-doping rule violation or who have been criminally convicted 
or professionally disciplined in relation to doping. This also 
prohibits association with any other Athlete who is acting as a 
coach or Athlete Support Person while serving a period of 
Ineligibility. Some examples of the types of association which are 
prohibited include: obtaining training, strategy, technique, 
nutrition or medical advice; obtaining therapy, treatment or 
prescriptions; providing any bodily products for analysis; or 
allowing the Athlete Support Person to serve as an agent or 
representative. Prohibited association need not involve any form 
of compensation. 


While Article 2.70 does not require the Anti-Doping 
Organization to notify the Athlete or other Person about the 
Athlete Support Person’s disqualifying status, such notice, if 
provided, would be important evidence to establish that the 
Athlete or other Person knew about the disqualifying status of 
the Athlete Support Person.]. 


2.l Acts by an Athlete or Other Person to Discourage or Retaliate 
Against Reporting to Authorities 


Where such conduct does not otherwise constitute a violation of 
Article 2.5: 


2.l.l Any act which threatens or seeks to intimidate another Person 
with the intent of discouraging the Person from the good-faith 
reporting of information that relates to an alleged anti-doping rule 
violation or alleged non-compliance with the Code to WADA, an 
Anti-Doping Organization, law enforcement, regulatory or 
professional disciplinary body, hearing body or Person conducting 
an investigation for WADA or an Anti-Doping Organization. 

2..2 Retaliation against a Person who, in good faith, has provided 


evidence or information that relates to an alleged anti-doping rule 
violation or alleged non-compliance with the Code to WADA, an 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Anti-Doping Organization, law enforcement, regulatory or 
professional disciplinary body, hearing body or Person conducting 
an investigation for WADA or an Anti-Doping Organization. '° 


6 [Comment to Article 2. //.2. This Article is intended to protect 
Persons who make good faith reports, and does not protect 
Persons who knowingly make false reports. | 


For purposes of Article 2.Il, retaliation, threatening and 
intimidation include an act taken against such Person either 
because the act lacks a good faith basis or is a disproportionate 
response.!7 


[7 [Comment to Article 2./7.2. Retaliation would include, for 
example, actions that threaten the physical or mental well-being 
or economic interests of the reporting Persons, their families or 
associates. Retaliation would not include an Anti-Doping 
Organization asserting in good faith an anti-doping rule violation 
against the reporting Person. For purposes of Article 2.//, a 
report is not made in good faith where the Person making the 
report knows the report to be false.|’. 


39 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 was enacted to promote and strengthen 
the anti-doping measures in sports and to provide a statutory framework for the 
operation of the National Anti-Doping Agency, the National Dope Test 
Laboratory, and for creation of the National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports. 


2. The said Act seeks to fulfil India’s obligations under the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization International Convention against 
Doping in Sport and commits to the principles of the World Anti-Doping Code. 


3. It has been the constant endeavour of the Government of India to 
strengthen the Anti-Doping framework and the amendments to the National 
Anti-Doping Act, 2022 are proposed in keeping with the need to align the said Act 
with the international best practices and the World Anti-Doping Code. The 
amendments in the said Act are in furtherance of ensuring a robust anti-doping 
ecosystem in India. 


4. The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025, inter alia, seeks to— 


(7) enhance institutional and operational independence of the National 
Anti-Doping Appeal Panel and the National Anti-Doping Agency to ensure 
autonomy in their decisions pertaining to operations, investigations and 
enforcement activities; 


(ii) further align the provisions of the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 
with international best practices and the World Anti-Doping Code; 


(iii) provide that such of the provisions of the World Anti-Doping 
Code as are set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India; and 


(iv) place Article 2 of the World Anti-Doping Code relating to 
Anti-Doping Rule Violations in the Schedule to the Act. 


5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


NEw DELHI; DR. MANSUKH MANDAVIYA. 
The \4th July, 2025. 


[Part II— 


Sec. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Bill do not involve any additional expenditure of 
recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India except what 
has already been envisaged under the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022. 


4l 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to insert section 2A in the National Anti-Doping 
Act, 2022, (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act) to provide for application 
of the World Anti-Doping Code, which mandates that such of the provisions of the 
said Code as are set out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India. 
Sub-section (2) thereof empowers the Central Government to amend the Schedule 
from time to time in conformity with any amendments made in the provisions of 
the said Code set out therein. 


2. Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (व) of sub-section (4) of 
section 26 of the principal Act to empower the Central Government to make rules 
regarding the functions of the dope testing laboratory, the procedure for 
submission to the said laboratory of samples for analysis or tests and other 
standard operative procedures, subject to the international standard for 
laboratories. 


3. Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend section 29 of the principal Act to 
empower the Central Government to make rules, inter alia, in respect of matters 
relating to— 


(i) the manner of constituting an Appeal Panel under sub-section (/) of 
section 2; (ii) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson and 
Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Appeal Panel and the conditions 
subject to which such appointment shall be made under sub-section (3) of 
section |2; (iii) the grounds on which a member of Appeal Panel may be 
removed under sub-section (4) of section 2; (iv) the other decisions against 
which an appeal may be filed, and the form and manner in which and the 
time within which such appeal may be filed under sub-section (/) of 
section 23; (v) the procedure to be followed by the Appeal Panel under 
sub-section (2) of section 23; (vi) the manner of communicating the decision 
of the Appeal Panel under sub-section (8) of section 23. 


4. Clause 2] of the Bill seeks to amend section 3] of the principal Act to 
empower the National Anti-Doping Agency to make regulations in compliance 
with international obligations and the Code including its International Standards. 


5. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules or regulations 
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative details and as such, it is 
not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General. 


[Part II— Sec. 2] 


MGIPMRND—4GI(S4)—24-7-2025. 


AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 


Digitally *0 by 
KSHITIZ fchimugran” 


MOHAN ‘isosos0s30" 


