रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


प्यारत का Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


Och. -S). Wet. -37.-29032025-26209 
CG-DL-E-29032025-26209 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, मार्च 28, 2025/85 7, 947 (शक) 
No. I] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, MARCH 28, 2025/CHAITRA 7, 947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bill was introduced in Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2025:— 


BILL No. 65 OF 2025 


A Bill to consolidate the law relating to ports, promote integrated port development, 
facilitate ease of doing business and ensure the optimum utilisation of 
India’s coastline; establish and empower State Maritime Boards for 
effective management of ports other than major ports; establish the 
Maritime State Development Council for fostering structured growth and 
development of the port sector; provide for the management of pollution, 
disaster, emergencies, security, safety, navigation, and data at ports; ensure 
compliance with India’s obligations under international instruments to 
which it is a party; take measures for the conservation of ports; provide 
for adjudicatory mechanisms for the redressal of port-related disputes; 
and address matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
. (J) This Act may be called the Indian Ports Act, 2025. 


Short title, 
commencement 
and application. 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed 
for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the 
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement 
of that provision. 


(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act,— 
(a) shall apply to— 


(7) all ports to which the provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 908 
applied immediately before the date of commencement of this Act; 


(ii) all new ports notified under sub-section (/) of section |; 


(iii) any part of the navigable rivers or channels leading to such 
ports as may be notified by the appropriate Government in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government; 


(iv) all vessels within port limits; and 


(v) all aircrafts making use of any part of the port, while on water, 
as they apply in relation to vessels; and 


(6) shall not apply to— 


(z) such port or navigable rivers or channels or vessels or class thereof, 
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; 


(ii) any vessel or aircraft making use of any part of the port 
belonging to or exclusively servicing, for military or non-commercial 
service of the Government, the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, 
customs authorities, Central Armed Forces and police and other agencies 
as may be notified by the Central Government; 


(iii) any vessel belonging to or in the service of the Central 
Government or the State Government; or 


(iv) any foreign vessel of war. 
Definitions. 2. (/) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” or “Government”, in relation to major 
ports, means the Central Government; and in relation to ports other than major 
ports, means the State Government; 


(6) “Authority”, in relation to— 
(i) major ports, means— 
(A) the Board of Major Port Authority; or 


(B) the board of directors, in case a port is registered as a 
company under the Companies Act, 203; and 


(ii) ports other than major ports, means the State Maritime Board 
of each State; 


(c) “Board of Major Port Authority” means the Board constituted by the 
Central Government under sub-section (/) of section 3 of the Major Port 
Authorities Act, 202, for each major port; 


(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Council; 


[Part H— 


5 of 908. 


8 of 20]3. 


l of 202]. 


SEc. 2] 


80 of 976. 


5 of 908. 


46 of 2023. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(e) “coastal waters” means any part of the territorial waters of India, along 
with any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India within the meaning of the 
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other 
Maritime Zones Act, 976, or any other law for the time being in force; 


(f) “concessionaire” means any person who has been granted any right, 
licence, permit or authorisation, by whatever name called, by the Government 
or the Authority, including by way of a concession agreement, for conducting 
all or any activity within a port; 


(g) “conservator” means a person or body of persons appointed for each port 
or two or more ports by the Government under sub-section (/) of section 8; 


(A) “convention” means an international convention to which India is a party; 


(0) “Council” means the Maritime State Development Council 
established under section 3; 


(0) “equipment”, in relation to a vessel, includes boats, tackle, 
machinery, boilers, cargo handling gear, pumps and any fitting, anchor, 
propeller, apparels, furniture, life-saving appliances of every description, 
spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes and signals of 
distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores and appliances, charts, 
radio installations, appliances for preventing, detecting or extinguishing fires, 
buckets, compasses, axes, lanterns, loading and discharging gears and 
appliances of all kinds and all other stores and spares or articles belonging to 
or to be used in connection with or necessary for navigation, propulsion, 
security, pollution prevention and safety of the vessel; 


(0 “existing port” means every port to which the provisions of the Indian 
Ports Act, 908 applied, immediately before the commencement of this Act; 


(J) “Magistrate” means a person exercising powers of the Magistrate 
under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; 


(m) “major port” means any port declared as such by the Central 
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a major port; 


(n) “master”, in relation to any vessel or aircraft making use of any port, 
means any person having for the time being the command or charge of the vessel 
or the aircraft, not being a pilot or harbour master or conservator of the port; 


(०) “mega port” means major port or port other than major port, 
classified as a mega port under section 73; 


(p) “mooring” means a fixed or floating structure or device which is used 
for the berthing and unberthing of any vessel or aircraft making use of a port, 
including shifting along the quayside, or is required for the safe operation of a 
waterborne vessel in the port or in the waterway access to the port; 


(q) “new port” means any port, other than an existing port, notified under 
sub-section (/) of section ; 


(r) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette 
and the term “notify” or “notified”, shall be construed accordingly; 


(s) “owner”, in relation to— 


(i) goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or agent for 
the sale, custody, loading or unloading of such goods; and 


(ii) any vessel or aircraft making use of any port, includes any 
registered owner, charterer, consignee or mortgagee in possession 
thereof; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(t) “pilot” means any person for the time being authorised by the 
Government to pilot vessels; 


(४) “port” includes any terminal, offshore terminal, shipyard, repair yard, 
ship breaking yard, bunkering station, captive jetties or roadstead or port 
facility or single buoy mooring which is normally used for the fuelling, 
re-fuelling, loading, unloading, embarkation or disembarkation of passengers, 
warehousing, building or repair or anchoring of vessels, or any other place at 
which a vessel can call, and any part of the navigable river or channel to which 
this Act extends, but shall not include any ship recycling activities; 


(v) “port facility” means any location or area including anchorages or awaiting 
berths or approaches from seaward as determined by the Central Government, or 
such designated authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify, 
where interface between vessels or a vessel and a port takes place; 


(w) “port limits” means the defined boundaries of the area of a port 
notified under sub-section (/) of section I]; 


(x) “port officer” means the conservator or harbour master or such other 
officers appointed under sub-sections (/) and (2) of section 8; 


(v) “port service provider” means a person who carries out all or any of 
the port works; 


(z) “port tariff’ means a scale of rates published under sub-section (2) of 
section 47 for the fees or other charges leviable under section 46; 


(za) “port user” means any person who avails the services of a port 
including port works; 


(zb) “port works” includes,— 


(i) designing, constructing, extending, maintaining, removing or 
demolishing— 


(a) maritime structures and other buildings, structures, 
machineries, equipment and enclosures; 


(b) railways, roads, bridges and embankments; 
(ii) reclaiming land from the sea or a river and dredging; 
(ii) supplying water, fuel or electricity to the port; 
(iv) providing labour to the port; 


(v) construction of dry docks, cruise terminal and water transport 
terminal; 


(vi) construction of port infrastructure; and 
(vii) any other services as may be notified by the Government; 


(zc) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate 
Government or by the Central Government in consultation with the State 
Government under this Act; 


(zd) “regulations” means regulations made by the Council under this Act; 
(ze) “Schedule” means a Schedule annexed to this Act; 


(2) “security” means maritime security and includes any measures 
undertaken by the owners or operators or persons in charge of the vessels or 
management of port facilities, offshore installations and other marine 
organisations or establishments, or undertaken by the Central Government, to 
protect ports or vessels or any person or thing relating directly or indirectly to 
maritime navigation,— 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


l of 202]. 
44 of 958. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


(i) against terrorism, sabotage, stowaways, illegal migrants, 
asylum seekers, piracy, armed robbery, seizure or pilferage; and 
04 piracy: uf p g 


(ii) against any other hostile act or influence, which threatens the 
security in the maritime transport sector; 


(zg) “State” means any State or Union territory in India having coastal 
location; 


(zh) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the 
Administrator thereof; 


(zi) “State Maritime Board” means the State Maritime Board referred to 
in sub-section (/) of section 3; 


(2) “vessel” includes every description of water craft used or capable of 
being used in the marine environment, such as ship, boat, sailing vessel, 
fishing vessel, submersible, semi-submersible, hydrofoils, non-displacement 
crafts, amphibious crafts, wing-in-ground crafts, pleasure crafts, barges, 
lighters, mobile offshore drilling units, mobile offshore units, or of any other 
description whether fitted with mechanical means of propulsion or not. 


(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Major Port Authorities Act, 202] or the Merchant Shipping Act, 958, shall have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts. 
CHAPTER II 
MARITIME STATE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL 
3. (7) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, for the Establishment of 


purposes of this Act, a Council to be called the Maritime State Development pail 
Council. 


(2) The Council shall consist of the following members, ex officio, namely:— 


(a) the Union Minister for Ports, Shipping and Waterways who shall be 
the Chairperson; 


(b) the Minister-in-charge of ports of each State; 
(c) the Minister-in-charge of the Union territory of Puducherry and the 
Administrators of all other coastal Union territories; 


(d) an officer equivalent in rank to the Secretary of the Government of 
India in the Indian Navy dealing with coastal security, to be nominated by 
the Central Government in the Ministry of Defence; 


(e) an officer equivalent in rank to the Secretary of the Government 
of India in the Indian Coast Guard dealing with coastal security, to be 
nominated by the Central Government in the Ministry of Defence; 


(f) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways, who shall be the Member Secretary of the Council. 


(3) The Chairperson may invite such persons to the meetings of the Council, 
in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations. 


(4) The Council shall transact business at its meetings in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations. 


(5) No member shall receive any remuneration for the performance of its 
functions under this Act. 


(6) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the 
office of a member of the Council shall not be deemed to be an office of profit. 


Powers of 
Chairperson. 


Vacancies etc., 
not to invalidate 
proceedings of 
Council. 


Functions of 
Council. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


4. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and 
directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Council and shall discharge other 
powers and functions of the Council as may be assigned to him under this Act. 


5. No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of,— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council; or 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the 
Council; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the 
merits of the case. 


6. (/) The Council shall,— 
(a) make recommendations to the Government on,— 


(i) the adequacy of the existing legal framework or statutory 
compliances, with a view to provide for a more efficient and conducive 
framework for ports in India; 


(ii) measures to facilitate growth of the port sector and to promote 
competition and efficiency in the operation of ports; 


(iii) port connectivity and assessing the requirement of other 
infrastructure through road, rail, inland waterways transport, pipeline 
and conveyor; 


(iv) any other matter relating to ports, as the Council may decide; and 


(v) any other matter as may be referred to it by the Central 
Government or the State Government; 


(6) discharge the following functions, in consultation with the Central 
Government and the State Governments, namely:— 


(i) to advise the Central Government on the formulation of the 
national perspective plan referred to in section |2; 


(ii) issue guidelines in respect of the following, namely:— 


(A) the data or information to be collected by ports and the 
manner of collection, storage, updation and submission of such 
data or information to the Council; 


(B) to provide for the manner in which any information, 
records, data and research studies relating to ports, shall be 
disseminated, including the grant of public access thereto; 


(C) for ensuring transparency of port tariff; 


(c) perform such other functions including administrative and financial 
functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government. 


(2) While discharging its functions, the Council shall exercise transparency 
and take into account the optimum management and utilisation of the available 
coastline, appropriate cost of logistics through multi-modality, national 
development priorities, sustainability and issues of national security. 


(3) Where the Council considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of 
discharging its functions under sub-section (/), it may, by order in writing, call upon 
the Authority, port or any person, at any time to furnish in writing, such information 
as the Council may require. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


7. (/) The Central Government may make available to the Council such 
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of the 
functions of the Council under this Act. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other conditions of service 
of the employees of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


8. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, make to the Council grants of such sums of money as are 
required by it to discharge its functions under this Act. 


9. The Council may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any 
member or employee of the Council, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act, except the 
power to make regulations or to issue guidelines, as it may deem necessary. 


CHAPTER III 
PORT AND PORT LIMITS 
0. No port shall commence or carry on operations therein unless it is,— 
(a) an existing port; or 
(b) a new port notified under sub-section (/) of section : 


Provided that the Government may, by notification, declare a port or part 
thereof non-operational in the following cases, namely:— 


(7) if such port or part thereof has been non-operational for a continuous 
period of ten years; or 


(7) in the interest of national security; or 
(iii) for any other reason, as the Government may deem fit. 
l. (/) The Government may notify a new port and alter the limits of any port: 


Provided that any notification issued under this sub-section for alteration of 
port limits shall not have retrospective effect. 


(2) The Central Government in consultation with State Government shall 
prescribe the norms, form and manner for declaring a new port and for altering the 
port limits under sub-section (/). 


2. (J) The Central Government may formulate a national perspective plan so 
as to meet the requirements of the maritime trade and to prioritise associated 
infrastructure development. 


(2) The Central Government, State Governments and the Authority shall 
endeavour to adhere to the national perspective plan formulated by the 
Central Government and the guidelines issued by the Council. 


CHAPTER IV 
STATE MARITIME BOARDS 
3. (/) Every State Maritime Board established or constituted by the State 


Government under the Acts specified in the Third Schedule, shall be deemed to be 
duly established or constituted for the purposes of this Act: 


Provided that where the State Maritime Board has not been established or 
constituted, the State Government may, by notification, establish a State Maritime 
Board within six months from the date of commencement of this Act: 


Employees of 
Council. 


Grants by 
Central 
Government. 


Delegation of 
powers of 
Council. 


Port operations. 


Notification of 
new port and 
alteration of port 
limits. 


Adherence to 
national 
perspective plan 
and guidelines 
issued by 
Council. 


Establishment of 
State Maritime 
Board. 


Transfer of 
assets and 
liabilities, etc. 


Functions of 
State Maritime 
Board. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided further that where the functions of the State Maritime Board are 
discharged by a body of persons or a department of the State Government, that 
Government may notify such body of persons or department, as the State Maritime 
Board for the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The State Maritime Board shall be a distinct legal entity, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract 
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The head office of the State Maritime Board shall be at such place as the 
State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 


4. (J) On and from the date of establishment or the date of notification of the 
State Maritime Board under sub-section (/) of section 3, the State Government 
shall transfer to the State Maritime Board, and vest, amongst other things,— 


(a) all port land, property, assets, funds, interest in property and all rights 
to levy rates vested in the State Government; 


(0) all rates, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the State 
Government; and 


(c) every employee serving under the State Government before such date 
solely or mainly for or in connection with affairs of the port. 


(2) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and 
all matters and things engaged to be done with or for the State Government till the 
date of establishment or the date of notification of the State Maritime Board under 
sub-section (/) of section 3, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or 
done by, with or for the State Maritime Board, and all suits or other legal 
proceedings instituted by or against the State Government till the date of 
establishment or the date of notification of the State Maritime Board, be continued 
or instituted by or against the State Maritime Board. 


5. (J) Every State Maritime Board shall be responsible for the effective 
administration, control and management of ports other than major ports within the 
territory of the respective State and for the said purpose, shall perform the following 
functions, namely:— 


(a) initiating plans for development of ports; 
(6) promoting the use, development and improvement of ports; 


(c) executing such works within or outside the limits of ports and providing 
such appliances to ports, as the Board may deem expedient or necessary; 


(d) exercising licensing functions in respect of infrastructure and 
services of ports; 


(e) exercising supervision and control over all port works, including port 
works contracted out to third parties; 


(f) regulating and controlling navigation within the limits and the 
approaches to the ports; 


(g) fixing of port tariff; 

(A) developing new ports, subject to obtaining security clearance as per 
the guidelines issued by the Central Government; 

(i) protecting ecological balance and safeguarding social and 
environmental issues; 

(j) advising or issuing directions in relation to matters referred to the 
Board by the State Government; 

(k) providing or ensuring the provision of such other services and facilities 
which may be considered necessary for the efficient operation of ports; 

(J) ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder; 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


5 of 908. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(m) carrying out all other functions that are or may be notified by the 
State Government. 


(2) The State Maritime Board shall ensure transparency in the exercise of its 
powers and discharging of its functions. 


(3) The State Maritime Board may, for the purposes of discharging its 
functions under sub-section (/), issue such directions from time to time, in writing, 
to any port or port officer, as it may consider necessary, and such port or port officer 
shall comply with such directions. 

CHAPTER V 
ADJUDICATION OF DISPUTES 

6. (J) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a Dispute 
Resolution Committee consisting of not less than three members, for the purposes 
of adjudicating any dispute arising between ports other than major ports, 
concessionaires, port users and port service providers within the State, unless the 
parties have agreed to arbitration or any other dispute resolution mechanism forming 
part of the concession agreement, licence, permit or authorisation. 


(2) An application for adjudication of any dispute referred to in 
sub-section (/) shall be made to the State Maritime Board in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed by the State Government and the State Maritime Board shall 
refer the application to the Dispute Resolution Committee. 


(3) The Dispute Resolution Committee shall, after giving the parties an 
opportunity of being heard, pass an order in writing within a period of six months 
from the date of receipt of the application by it: 


Provided that where the Dispute Resolution Committee is unable to dispose 
of such dispute within the stipulated period of six months, it may extend the period 
of disposal upto three months at a time, with reasons to be recorded in writing, but 
such period including extended period, shall not exceed twelve months in any case. 


(4) The Dispute Resolution Committee shall, for the purposes of discharging 
its function under sub-section (/), have the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 908, while trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other 
documents; 


(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining 
them on oath; 


(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and 
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed by the State Government. 
(5) Any party aggrieved by an order of the Dispute Resolution Committee under 
sub-section (3), may prefer an appeal to the High Court of the appropriate jurisdiction, 
within sixty days from the date on which a copy of the order is received by the party. 
7. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of any matter which the Dispute Resolution Committee is empowered by or 
under this Act to determine. 
CHAPTER VI 
PORT OFFICERS 
8. (J) The Government shall appoint such officers or body of persons to be 
the conservator for every port, or for two or more ports. 


(2) Every port shall appoint a harbour master or such other officers of the port 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 

(3) The terms and condition of service of the officers appointed under 
sub-sections (/) and (2) shall be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


Resolution of 
disputes. 


Civil court not to 
have 
jurisdiction. 


Appointment of 
conservator, 
harbour master 
and other port 
officers. 


l0 


Powers of 
conservator to 
issue directions. 


Removal of 
obstructions 
within port 
limits. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(4) The conservator shall be subject to the control of the Government and the 
Authority. 


(5) All officers operating in a port shall be subject to the supervision and 
control of the conservator. 


(6) The conservator may, with the approval of the Government, delegate such 
of its powers to such persons, as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


9. (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the conservator may, with respect 
to any vessel within the port, issue such directions as may be necessary for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the conservator 
may issue directions relating to all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the berthing, mooring or anchoring including the method of 
anchoring, of a vessel; 


(b) the removal of the vessel from any place within the port to any other 
place and the time within which such removal is to be effected; 


(c) the regulation, restriction or prohibition of movement of vessels in 
the port and the approaches to the port; 


(d) requiring the master of any vessel to place at his disposal, such 
number of crew as may be deemed fit, for the purpose of preventing or 
extinguishing fire or for any other matter under this Act; 


(e) prohibiting any vessel from entering or leaving the port, where such 
vessel fails to comply with the provisions of this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force or the rules, regulations or directions issued thereunder; 


(f) cutting, or causing to be cut, any warp or rope endangering the safety 
of any vessel in the port. 


(3) If any person refuses or neglects to obey any direction of the conservator 
under this section, the conservator may cause or cause to be done, all necessary acts 
for execution of the directions and may hire and employ suitable persons for this 
purpose, and all expenses incurred in this behalf shall be recoverable from the 
person for such refusal or neglect. 


20. (/) The conservator may remove, or cause to be removed, either on his 
own or through external agency or through a port officer, any obstruction in any part 
of a port, which in his opinion obstructs the operation of a port or part thereof or any 
other work on any part of the shore or bank within the port limits. 


(2) The owner of any such obstruction shall be liable to pay the reasonable 
expenses of the removal thereof. 


(3) If the owner of any such obstruction fails to pay the reasonable expenses 
incurred in the removal thereof, the conservator may sell the vessels, wreck, material 
or any other thing forming the obstruction in public auction and recover expenses 
incurred for such removal from the proceeds of the sale, and shall pay the surplus 
of such proceeds, or deliver the unsold parts of the obstruction, to the person entitled 
to receive the same and if no such person is available, the conservator shall cause 
the same to be kept and deposited in such manner as the Government directs. 


(4) The conservator may, if necessary, from time to time, realise the expenses 
of keeping the obstruction, together with the expenses of sale, by a further sale of 
such part of the obstruction as may remain unsold. 


(5) If the obstruction exists on account of any permit, grant, licence or other 
lawful instrument issued by the Government, then the conservator shall report the 
same to the Government, and, with the previous sanction of the Government, cause 
the same to be removed or altered in such manner, making reasonable compensation 
to the owner of such obstruction, to be determined on the basis of such factors, as 
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the term “obstruction” 
includes any structure or a vessel or wreck or part thereof, or any material such as 
cargo, bunker or pollutant or such other thing or any public nuisance, impeding or 
likely to impede the operation of the port. 


2. The Government may, by notification, specify restrictions on certain activities 
within port limits which may cause any impediment to the navigation in a port. 


22. (/) If any vessel hooks or gets foul of any of the buoys or moorings laid 
down by the conservator in a port, the master of such vessel or any other person 
shall not, except in case of emergency, lift the buoys or moorings for the purpose of 
unhooking or getting clear from the same without the assistance of the conservator. 


(2) The conservator, immediately on receiving notice of any emergency, under 
sub-section (/), shall assist and superintend the clearing of such vessel and the 
master of such vessel shall, upon demand, pay such reasonable expenses as may be 
incurred in clearing the same. 


23. (/) The conservator, or any person appointed under this Act to receive fees 
or charges related to any vessel, may, when necessary for the performance of duties 
under this Act, board any vessel or enter any building or place within the port limits, 
either alone or accompanied by any other person or body of persons. 


(2) No master of a vessel or any person in possession or occupation of the 
building or place shall without lawful excuse refuse the conservator or any person 
or body of persons to board or enter such vessel, building or place. 


24. (/) The Government may appoint an empanelled medical practitioner as 
the health officer to carry out the functions of the health officer at any port. 


(2) The health officer shall possess such qualification, experience and be 
subject to such other terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government. 


(3) The health officer shall, subject to the control of the Government, have the 
following powers, within the port limits, namely:— 


(a) to inspect the provisions, water, sanitation and accommodation 
within vessels; 


(b) to enter or board any vessel and medically examine all or any of the 
seafarers on board the vessel; 


(c) to require and enforce the production of the log-book and any other 
books, papers or documents as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of 
enquiring into the health and medical condition of persons on board the vessel; 


(d) to summon and question any person for any purpose, to require 
responses from the person questioned, and to make and sign a declaration 
affirming the truth of the statements made by such person. 


(4) Whenever any infectious or contagious disease has broken out or is reasonably 
suspected to break out at any port or part thereof, the appropriate Government may— 


(a) declare such port or part thereof as an infected zone, and require all 
persons coming out from an infected zone to be medically inspected or 
examined by a health officer; and 


(b) prescribe the measures to be taken at such infected zone. 


(5) Whenever any infectious or contagious disease has broken out or is 
reasonably suspected to break out in vessels arriving at, or being in, any port,— 


I] 


Power to specify 
restrictions on 
activities within 
port limits. 


Fouling of 
moorings. 


Power to board 
vessels and enter 
buildings. 


Appointment 
and powers of 
health officer 
and prevention 
of contagious 
diseases. 


2 


Indemnity of 
Government 
against act or 
default of port 
officers or pilot. 


Damage to 
property of port. 


Warping. 


Master to take 
order to 
extinguish fire. 


Offences in 
connection with 
safety of vessels, 
etc. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) the conservator shall take such action, and pass such directions to 
such persons for the prevention or containment of the spread of any infectious 
or contagious disease, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government; 


(b) the master shall report the particulars of any such disease to the 
Government or the conservator in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


(6) The health officer, along with such person or body of persons authorised 
by the Government, may board the vessel for medical inspection of vessels and of 
persons on board the vessels. 


25. The Government shall not be liable for any act or default of any 
conservator, harbour master or other port officers or of any deputy or assistant of 
any of the authorities aforesaid or of any person acting under the control or direction 
of any such authority, deputy or assistant, or for any act or default of any pilot or for 
any damage sustained by any vessel in consequence of any defect in any of the 
moorings, hawsers or other things belonging to the Government which may be used 
by the vessel: 


Provided that nothing in this section shall protect the Government from a suit 
in respect of any act done by or under the express order or sanction of the 
Government. 


CHAPTER VII 
SAFETY AND CONSERVATION OF PORTS 
26. (/) No person shall, without lawful excuse, remove, destroy or damage 
any property including any pier or wharf belonging to, or in the custody or 


possession of, the port, or hinder or prevent such property from being used or 
operated in the manner it is intended to be used or operated. 


(2) Any person who does any act in violation of the provisions of sub-section (/), 
shall, in addition to any other penalty specified under column (4) of the Second 
Schedule, be liable to pay such expenses, as the conservator may determine to be just 
and reasonable, on the basis of such factors, as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government for any loss, destruction or damage suffered by the port, including the 
expenses of any inspection or survey carried out, having regard to the circumstances of 
the case. 


27. Every master of a vessel in any port shall, when directed by the 
conservator, permit warps or hawsers to be made fast to the vessel for the purpose 
of warping any other vessel in the port, and shall not allow any such warp or hawser 
to be let go until so directed by the conservator. 


28. Every master of a vessel lying in any port shall take order to extinguish 
any fire on the vessel, and co-operate with the conservator or any person acting 
under the authority of the conservator, in extinguishing or attempting to extinguish 
any fire on the vessel. 


29. (/) No person shall wilfully and without lawful excuse,— 


(a) loosen or remove from its moorings or from its fastenings any vessel in 
the port without leave or authority from the master or owner of such vessel; or 


(0) lift, injure, make a vessel fast to, loosen or set adrift any moorings, 
buoys, beacons or sea or landmarks; or 


(c) discharge any firearm in the port; or 


(d) do or omit to do any act on board any vessel in the port which has 
caused or likely to cause fire; or 


[Part H— 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) use a vessel in the port which is in such a state that by reason of the 
defective condition of its hull, equipment or machinery, or by reason of 
under-manning or otherwise, the life of any person or the safety of any other 
vessel navigating in the port is likely to be endangered. 


(2) No master of a vessel shall cause or suffer any warp or hawser attached to 
his vessel to be left out in any port in such a manner as to endanger the safety of any 
other vessel navigating in the port. 


(3) No person shall grave, bream or smoke any vessel in the port, or boil or 
heat any pitch, tar, resin, dammar, turpentine oil or other such combustible matter 
on board any vessel within port limits, if such act is prohibited by the Government, 
or contrary to the orders or directions of the conservator. 


30. No person, without the permission of the conservator shall, in any port, 
creep or sweep for anchors, cables or other stores lost or supposed to be lost therein. 


3. No person shall, except with the permission of the conservator and under the 
supervision of such person as may be appointed by the conservator, in any port,— 


(a) disturb the existing waterbed or geophysical structures or any 
artificial protection or constructions or shore of the port; or 


(6) sink or bury in any part of such bank or shore, whether the same is 
public or private property, any mooring-post, anchor or any other thing; or 


(c) do any other thing which is likely to cause damage to such bank or shore. 


32. (/) No vessel shall enter, leave or be moved in any port without having a 
pilot, harbour master or any port officer on board, unless,— 


(a) upon application to the proper officer the master was unable to 
procure a pilot, harbour master or port officer to go on board the vessel; 


(6) an authority in writing has been obtained from the conservator or any 
officer authorised to give such authority: 


Provided that the Government may, by notification, direct that in any port as 
may be specified therein, the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to sailing 
vessels of any measurement not exceeding a measurement so specified therein. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (/), the owner or master of a 
vessel, shall be answerable for any loss or damage caused by the vessel or by any 
fault of the navigation of the vessel. 


33. A port officer shall, if required by an officer authorised by a general or 
special order of the Central Government, co-operate as directed by the officer, 
in carrying out manoeuvres related to the defence of the port in time of war, or 
for the security of the port against sub-conventional or non-traditional threats, or 
natural disasters, and, if necessary, temporarily make available the services of 
their staff, vessels, property, equipment or other resources: 


Provided that the Central Government shall bear the running expenses of 
vessels placed at the disposal of such officer in respect of the period during which 
they are so at his disposal, and be responsible for any damage thereto. 


Explanation—For the purposes of this section, the expression 
“running expenses” shall include all expenses incurred in connection with the 
use of the vessels other than any charges for their hire or for the wages of the 
officers and crews of such vessels. 


34. (/) The Authority may issue guidelines for the purposes of regulating the 
following matters and activities, namely:— 


3 


Unauthorised 
person not to 
search for lost 
stores. 

Injuring banks or 
shores of port 
prohibited. 


Moving of 
vessels without 
pilot or 
permission of 
harbour master 
or port officer. 


Port officer to 
co-operate in 
manoeuvres for 
defence of port. 


Authority and 
Director-General 
to regulate 
certain activities. 


Definitions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) the vessel movement and safety of navigation, including determining 
the schedules and procedural protocols for vessel entry, departure, and transit 
within port limits; 


(b) assigning the berths, including designating specific berths, stations, 
and areas for vessel docking in the port; 

(c) the anchor and equipment management, focusing on the correct 
stowage and positioning of cargo gear, anchors, and other external apparatus 
on vessels; 


(d) the cargo and passenger operations, including regulating locations 
and methods for passenger embarkation and loading and unloading of cargo; 


(e) standards for bunkering practices and equipment for vessel fueling 
operations; 


(f) specifying the requirements for the clear passage to ensure designated 
safe passage areas are maintained near docking structures and within port limits; 


(g) standards and procedure for mooring and anchoring of vessels and 
related equipment; 


(A) specifying the access and usage protocols for Government-owned 
docking and storage facilities; 


(i) standards and procedures for licensing various maritime transport 
vessels and the conditions for licence renewal or revocation; 


(j) specifying protocols for the consistent and safe use of visual and 
signal aids by vessels and ports; 


(k) standards relating to occupational health, safety and security of dock 
workers, seafarers and port visitors; and 


(J) the protocols to ensure seafarer and port workers’ welfare-related 
resources and activities. 


(2) The Director-General may also issue such guidelines on any of the matters and 


activities specified in sub-section (/), as may be deemed necessary, from time to time. 


(3) Any guidelines issued by the Authority under sub-section (/), shall be in 


conformity with the guidelines issued by the Director-General under sub-section (2). 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “Director-General” means the 


Director-General appointed under the Merchant Shipping Act, 958. 


CHAPTER VIII 
PREVENTION, CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION AND RESPONSE 
35. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Ballast Water Management Convention” means the International 
Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and 
Sediments, 2004; 


(b) “cargo residues” means the remnants of any cargo material on board 
which remain on the deck or in holds or tanks following loading and unloading, 
including loading and unloading excess or spillage, whether in wet or dry 
condition or entrained in wash-water, but does not include cargo dust remaining 
on the deck after sweeping or dust of the external surfaces of the vessel; 


(c) “MARPOL Convention” means the International Convention for the 
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, |973, including its Protocol of 978; 


(d) “reception facility” means any facility which is fixed, floating or 
mobile and capable of providing the service of receiving the waste from 
vessels; 


[Part H— 


44 of 958. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(e) “waste from vessels” or “vessel-generated waste” means every 
waste, including cargo residues, which is generated during the service of a 
vessel or during loading, unloading and cleaning operations and which falls 
within the scope of Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to the MARPOL Convention 
and the Ballast Water Management Convention. 


36. Every port shall provide reception facilities adequate to meet the needs of 
vessels without causing undue delay to vessels, in compliance with the provisions 
relating to reception facilities specified in Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI of the 
MARPOL Convention or with the requirements of Article 5 of the Ballast Water 
Management Convention, as applicable, based on such conditions as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, the term “adequate” means 


capable of receiving the types and quantities of wastes from vessels normally using 
that port, taking into account the operational needs of the port users, its size and 
geographical location and the types of vessels calling at that port. 


37. Where in respect of any port it appears to the Central Government, on the 
basis of the audit conducted under section 42 or otherwise, that the port has no 
reception facilities or if the port has such facilities, those facilities are not adequate 
within the meaning of section 36, the Central Government or an officer authorised 
by it may, by order in writing, direct the port to provide, or arrange for the provision 
of, such reception facilities as may be specified in that order. 


38. (/) Every port shall prepare a port waste reception and handling plan in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government. 


(2) Upon approval of the port waste reception and handling plan by the Central 
Government, such plan shall be implemented by the port. 


(3) Every port shall communicate such information about the port waste 
reception and handling plan to vessels in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


39. The operator, agent or master of a vessel bound for India shall submit an 
advance waste notice to the port of call in such form and manner and within such 
time period as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with 
the State Government. 


40. (J) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the State Government, the master of a vessel 
calling at a port shall, before leaving that port, deliver all its vessel-generated waste 
carried on board to a reception facility. 


(2) Upon delivery, the port where the waste was delivered shall issue the waste 
delivery receipt to the master of the vessel in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


4. (/) A port providing reception facilities or a person providing such 
facilities by arrangement with the port may levy such charges for the use of the 
facilities. 


(2) The reception facility provided at the port shall be made available for use 
by any vessel subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the port and on 
payment of the charges referred to in sub-section (/). 


42. (/) The Central Government shall audit every port at such intervals and in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with 
the State Government. 


5 


Reception 
facilities. 


Direction to 
provide adequate 
reception 
facilities. 


Port waste 
reception and 
handling plans. 


Advance waste 
notice. 


Delivery of 
vessel-generated 
waste. 


Charges for 
vessel-generated 
waste. 


Audit of ports. 


6 


Maintenance of 
information on 
portal. 


Measures for 
prevention or 
containment of 
pollution. 


Directions for 
securing 
compliance. 


Levy of fees and 
other charges. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) The audit under sub-section (/) shall be carried out for the purposes of 
checking the availability and adequacy of reception facilities in accordance with this 
Chapter and the rules made thereunder, and shall include audit of such pollution 
containment equipment as may be specified by the Central Government, from time 
to time. 


43. The following information shall be uploaded electronically in such manner 
and by such persons as may be notified by the Central Government, namely: — 


(a) advance waste notice under section 39; 

(b) waste delivery receipt under sub-section (2) of section 40; 

(c) request by a vessel for availing reception facilities; and 

(4) such other matters as may be notified by the Central Government. 


44, (/) Every port shall report the particulars of any incident that threatens or 
is likely to pose a threat of pollution to the coastal waters or related interests, to the 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government. 


(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that an incident which threatens 
or is likely to pose a threat of pollution to the coastal waters or related interests has 
taken place or is likely to take place, it may direct the port or State Government or 
the Authority or organisation, as may be applicable, to take such action for the 
prevention or containment or threat of such pollution in accordance with the 
applicable law. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “coastal 
waters” shall mean and include any part of the territorial waters of India, along with 
any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India or any marine area adjacent thereto 
over which India has, or, may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to 
control of marine pollution under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, 
Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, [976, or any other law 
for time being in force. 


45. The Government may issue directions to any port or port officer to comply 
with any of the provisions of this Chapter. 


CHAPTER IX 
LEVY OF FEES AND OTHER CHARGES 


46. There shall be leviable such fees or other charges in each of the ports in 
respect of — 


(a) consideration payable to the port by owners or agents of vessels or 
shippers in lieu of services rendered by such port including but not limited to— 


(7) providing usage of or access to all or any part of the port; 
(7) loading or unloading of cargo; 

(iii) embarking or disembarking of passengers; 

(iv) storage of materials; 

(v) supplying provisions or equipment to vessels; 


(vi) handling, storing and transporting goods on land adjoining 
ports and for the handling of passengers carried by the vessels; 


(vii) embarking or disembarking of masters, crew and other 
personnel, if payable; 


(viii) repairing of vessel; 


[Part H— 


80 of 976. 


SEc. 2] 


8 of 203. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(ix) providing aids to navigation within the port limits; 


(x) carrying passengers or goods between vessels in the port or port 
approaches; 


(xi) stevedoring, landing and shipping of passengers or goods from 
or to such vessels; 


(xii) wharfage, storage or demurrage of goods on any such place; 
(xiii) pilotage and berth hire; 

(xiv) towage; and 

(xv) waterfront royalty; 


(0) consideration payable by or to the port for port works pertaining to 
the maintenance of ports; 


(c) realisations from usage of land and property belonging to, or in the 
possession or occupation of, the Authority. 


47. (/) (a) The port tariff for every major port shall be fixed by— 


(7) the Board of Major Port Authority or such person or body of persons 
authorised by it; or 


(ii) the board of directors, in case a port is registered as a company under 
the Companies Act, 203; 


(b) the port tariff for every port other than major port shall be fixed by the 
respective State Maritime Boards or such concessionaire as may be authorised by 
the concerned State Maritime Board. 


(2) The port tariff fixed under sub-section (/) shall be published electronically 
by the Authority or concessionaire or person or body of persons, responsible for 
fixing the port tariff. 


(3) The port tariff fixed under sub-section (/) shall come into effect after 
expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of its publication. 


(4) The Council may issue guidelines on any matter relating to transparency 
of port tariff including the components thereof. 


(5) The Authority may, based on any recommendation by the Government, in 
special cases exempt or, remit the whole or any portion of the fees or other charges 
due or payable under this Act. 


48. (/) The Government shall, by notification, authorise at any port, an officer 
or body of persons who may receive the fees or other charges payable under this 
Act and to expend the receipts thereof, subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the notification. 


(2) The officer or body of persons authorised to receive fees or other charges, 
shall issue a receipt in lieu of such fees or other charges, in such form and manner 
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, containing the following 
particulars, namely:— 


(a) name of the issuing office; 


(b) the port or place at which the fees or other charges due or payable is paid; 
and 


(c) the name, gross tonnage and other proper description of the vessel in 
respect of which the payment is made, as applicable. 


7 


Port tariff. 


Receipt of fees 
or other charges. 


I8 


Owner, agent or 
master to report 
arrival. 


Detention and 
sale on refusal to 
pay fees or other 
charges. 


Grant of 
port-clearance. 


Master not to 
evade payment 
of fees or other 
charges. 


Offences and 
penalties. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


49. The owner, agent or master of every vessel liable to pay any other fees or 
other charges shall, on arrival of such vessel within the port limits, report her arrival 
to the conservator in such form, manner and within such time as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


50. (/) If the master of any vessel in respect of which any fees or other charges 
are payable under this Act refuses or fails to pay the same on demand, the officer or 
body of persons authorised under sub-section (/) of section 48 may detain or arrest 
the vessel or any part thereof, until the amount due is paid. 


(2) In case any part of the fees or other charges, or of the costs of the detention or 
arrest or of the keeping of the vessel detained or arrested remains unpaid for fifteen days 
after any such detention or arrest, such officer or body of persons may cause the vessel 
detained or arrested to be sold, and with the proceeds of such sale, may recover the fees 
or other charges and the cost including the costs of sale remaining unpaid, and shall 
render the surplus, if any, to the master of the vessel upon demand: 


Provided that where such vessel is already arrested under the order of a court 
or other authority, the authority appointed to receive fees or other charges, may sell 
the vessel or part thereof only with the prior permission of such court or other 
authority and recover the fees or other charges due and the costs including costs of 
sale remaining unpaid, and disburse the surplus, if any, in accordance with the orders 
or directions of such court or other authority. 


(3) Where the sale proceeds of the vessel is insufficient to satisfy the fees or 
other charges due and the cost including the costs of sale remains unpaid, the 
authority appointed to receive such fees or other charges due may, by order in 
writing direct the owner of the vessel to pay the unpaid balance, within one month 
of issuance of such order. 


5. No port-clearance shall be granted to any vessel until the owner or master 
or agent or port user has paid or secured to the satisfaction of the officer granting 
the clearance the amount of all fees or charges, and of all fines, penalties and 
expenses to which the vessel or her owner or master is liable under this Act. 


52. (/) No master of a vessel shall evade the payment of any fees or other 
charges required to be paid under this Act. 


(2) In any proceeding before a Magistrate, any document issued by the officer 
empowered to grant port clearance under section 5 stating that the master has 
evaded such payment shall be sufficient proof of the evasion, unless the master 
shows to the satisfaction of the Magistrate that the departure of the vessel without 
payment of the sum was caused by stress of weather, or that there was lawful or 
reasonable ground for such departure. 


(3) Any Magistrate having jurisdiction under this Act in any port to which the 
vessel may proceed, or in which she may be found, shall be deemed to have 
jurisdiction in any proceeding under this section. 


CHAPTER X 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES 


53. (/) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply with 
any provision thereof, shall be liable to penalty under this Act and, if, in respect of 
any offence or contravention no punishment or penalty is specially provided, shall 
be liable to penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and if the breach is a 
continuing one, with further penalty which may extend to one thousand rupees for 
every day, after the first day, during which the breach continues. 


(2) The offences mentioned in column (2) of the First Schedule, shall be 
punishable to the extent of punishment mentioned in the corresponding column (4) 
of that Schedule against the offence specified in column (2) of that Schedule. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, where any offence is 


attributable to a port under column (2) of the First Schedule, the fine specified for 
such offence under column (4) thereof, shall be payable by the Authority; or by the 
concessionaire where such port is operated by the conservator. 


(3) Whoever contravenes any provision mentioned in column (2) of the 
Second Schedule, shall be liable to the extent of penalty mentioned in the 
corresponding column (4) of that Schedule against the contravention specified in 
column (2) of that Schedule. 


54. (/) The authority for imposing the penalty under the Second Schedule shall 
be the conservator. 


(2) For the purposes of imposition of penalty under this Chapter, where the 
conservator is a body of persons, the authority for imposition of penalty shall mean, 
one person appointed from amongst such body of persons, in such manner as may 
be prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The conservator shall, before imposing any penalty specified under the 
Second Schedule, give the parties an opportunity of being heard. 


(4) Every order of imposition of penalty under this section shall be in writing. 


(5) Any contravention of the provisions of this Act for which penalty has been 
provided may be compounded for the first contravention by such officer as may be 
notified by the Central Government in this behalf. 


55. No Court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall take 
cognizance of any offence specified under the First Schedule. 


56. Any person who wilfully fails to comply with any order of the Dispute 
Resolution Committee against which no appeal has been preferred, shall be liable 
to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in addition, penalty which 
may extend to one thousand rupees for every day during which such default 
continues. 


57. No person shall,— 


(a) make any statement or furnish any document which the person knows 
or has reason to believe to be false in any material particular; or 


(b) omit to state any material fact knowing it to be material; or 


(c) wilfully alter, suppress or destroy any document which is required to 
be furnished. 


58. Any fine imposed by the Magistrate under the First Schedule, or, penalty 
imposed by the conservator under the Second Schedule, may be recovered 
by distress and sale of the vessel or part thereof, as may be deemed necessary. 


59. (/) Any dispute as to the sum to be paid as expenses or damages under 
this Act shall be determined by a Magistrate upon an application made for that 
purpose by either of the disputing parties. 


(2) Any sum payable as expenses or damages under this Act which does 
not exceed twenty thousand rupees may be recovered by the conservator or 
the Magistrate, as if it were a penalty or fine. 


60. Whenever any penalty, fine, expenses or damages is or are levied 
under this Act by distress and sale, the cost of distress and sale may be levied in 
addition to such penalty, fine, expenses or damages, and in the same manner. 


9 


Authority for 
imposition of 
penalty and 
procedure 
therefor. 


Cognizance of 
offences. 


Penalty for 
wilful failure to 
comply with 
orders of 
Dispute 
Resolution 
Committee. 


Penalty for 
failure to furnish 
information, etc. 


Recovery of fine 
or penalty. 


Recovery of 
expenses and 
damages. 


Cost of distress. 


20 


Magistrate to 
determine 
amount to be 
levied in case of 
dispute. 


Place of trial and 
jurisdiction. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Service of 
documents. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


6l. If any dispute arises concerning the amount leviable by any distress or 
arrest under this Act or the costs payable under section 60, the person making the 
distress or arrest may detain the goods seized or arrested, or the proceeds of the sale 
thereof, until the amount to be levied has been determined by a Magistrate who, 
upon an application made for that purpose, may determine the amount and award 
such costs to be paid by either of the parties to the other of them as the Magistrate 
may deem reasonable and payment of such costs if not paid on demand, shall be 
enforced as if they were a fine. 


62. (J) Any person committing any offence under this Act may be tried for 
such offence in any place in which that person may be found, or before any 
Magistrate having jurisdiction over any district or place adjoining the port in which 
the offence takes place, or in any court in which that person may be tried under any 
other law for time being in force. 


(2) The Magistrate referred to in sub-section (/) may exercise all the powers 
of a Magistrate under this Act in the same manner and to the same extent as if the 
offence had been committed locally within the limits of his jurisdiction, 
notwithstanding that the offence may not have been committed locally within such 
limits and in case any such Magistrate exercises the jurisdiction hereby vested in 
him, the offence shall be deemed, for all purposes, to have been committed locally 
within the limits of his jurisdiction. 


63. (/) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, 
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to 
any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed 
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the 
commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (/), where an offence under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the 
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation —For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a co-operative 
society, a firm, a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 or other association of individuals; and 


(0) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


64. (/) Where, for the purposes of this Act any document is to be served on 
any person, that document may be served in any case by delivering a copy thereof 
personally to the person to be served or by leaving the same at his last place of 
residence, or by post. 


(2) If the document is to be served— 


(a) on the harbour master of a port, where there is one, by leaving the 
same for him at the port, with the person being or appearing to be in command 
of the port; 


[Part H— 


6 of 2009. 


SEc. 2] 


20 of 202I. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(09) on the master of a vessel, where there is one, by leaving the same for 
him on board that vessel, with the person being or appearing to be in command 
or charge of the vessel; and 


(c) on the master of a vessel, or if there is no master and the vessel is in 
India, on the owner of the vessel, or, if such owner is not in India, on any agent 
of the owner residing in India, or, where no such agent is known or can be 
found, by affixing a copy thereof on the vessel or at a suitable place on the 
bridge. 


65. (/) In any port where hoisting is mandated by the conservator, no vessel shall 
hoist, carry or wear, any flag, jack, pennant or colours, the use whereof is unlawful. 


(2) Every foreign vessel calling at a port in India shall hoist the flag of the flag 
State of the vessel and the flag of the Republic of India. 


66. (/) Every port shall frame an emergency preparedness and response plan 
for the purposes of safety, security, disaster management and pollution incidents in 
accordance with applicable law. 


(2) The plan referred to in sub-section (/) shall be submitted to the Central 
Government for its approval in such manner as may be directed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the State Government. 


(3) The Central Government may grant approval to the plan after taking into 
consideration such factors as may be notified by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government. 


(4) The conservator may issue directions for the implementation of the 
approved plan and the Central Government may audit such implementation. 


(5) The Central Government may, either suo motu or on the basis of an audit 
under sub-section (4), issue directions to any person in order to ensure compliance 
with the provisions of this section and put in place a national emergency response 
mechanism. 


67. Every port shall report the particulars of any incident such as property 
damage, vessels sinking, vessel collisions or fire, in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


68. Every port shall provide such shore based welfare services as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government, 
for seafarers of vessels calling at the port. 


69. (7) The Central Government may, by notification, direct a port to adopt a 
mechanism for electronically integrating such port related data as may be notified 
by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government, with the port 
community system or any other centralised system. 


(2) Every port shall maintain vessel traffic service within the port limits in 
accordance with applicable law. 


Explanation —For the purposes of this section, the expressions,— 


(a) “port community system” means a secure electronic system 
integrating the trade related information submitted and exchanged therein, 
serving as a centralised portal for ports and other relevant stakeholders in 
accordance with the Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime 
Traffic, |965 or any other requirement as may be directed by the Central 
Government; 


(b) “vessel traffic service” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
in the Marine Aids to Navigation Act, 202]. 


0 


Hoisting 
unlawful colours 
in port. 


Emergency 
preparedness 
and response 
plan. 


Reporting of 
incident. 


Shore based 
welfare services 
for seafarers. 


Port community 
system and 
vessel traffic 
service. 


22 


Order for 
securing 
compliance. 


Prior clearance. 


Obligations of 
ports under 
international 
conventions. 


Notification of 
mega port. 


Chairperson, 
members, 
officers and 
employees of 
Council, etc., to 
be public 
servants. 
Application of 
certain laws. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


70. The Central Government may issue directions to such port, port facility, 
port officer, or person, to ensure compliance with any other laws for the time being 
in force and the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 958 relating to the safety 
and security of port facilities. 


7. Any port undergoing a change in substantial ownership or effective control 
shall obtain a prior clearance from the Central Government or a person authorised 
by it, in such form and manner and within such time as may be notified by the 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


72. Every port shall ensure that the obligations, under the international 
conventions to which India is a party and as prescribed by the Central 
Government, are discharged in accordance with such conventions. 


73. (/) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Government, 
by notification, specify the criteria for classification of a port as mega port. 


(2) The Central Government may notify any major port, which satisfies the 
criteria notified under sub-section (/), as a mega port. 


(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Government, 
notify any port other than major port, which satisfies the criteria notified under 
sub-section (/), as a mega port. 


(4) Notwithstanding its classification as a mega port under this section, a port shall 
retain its status as either a major port or a port other than a major port, as applicable, and 
shall continue to be governed by the respective laws applicable to such port. 


74. All members, officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed, 
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, 
to be public servants within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


75. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of, 
the Major Port Authorities Act, 202] and the Merchant Shipping Act, 958, in so 
far as they relate to ports. 


76. (४) The Central Government may, by notification and subject to the 
condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the 
employees of the Council under sub-section (2) of section 7; 


(6) other officers of the port to be appointed under sub-section (2) of 
section 8; 


(c) the terms and conditions of service of the officers under 
sub-section (3) of section 8; 


(d) the powers to be delegated by the conservator and the persons to 
whom such powers may be delegated under sub-section (6) of section 8; 


(e) the manner of removal or alteration of obstruction and factors for 
determining compensation under sub-section (5) of section 20; 


(f) the qualifications, experience and other terms and conditions of service 
of the health officer to be appointed under sub-section (2) of section 24; 


[Part H— 


44 of 958. 


45 of 2023. 


l of 202]. 


44 of 958. 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(g) the measures to be taken at infected zone under clause (b) of 
sub-section (4) of section 24; 


(0) the factors to be considered by the conservator in determining the 
expenses to be paid under sub-section (2) of section 26; 


(i) the form and manner of receipt of fees or other charges under 
sub-section (2) of section 48; 


() the manner of appointment of conservator from a body of persons 
under sub-section (2) of section 54; 


(k) the obligations to be discharged by the ports under section 72. 


77. (/) The State Government may, by notification in the State Gazette and 


subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the form and manner of making an application for adjudication of 
disputes referred to the State Maritime Board under sub-section (2) of section 6; 


(b) other matters in respect of which the State Maritime Board shall exercise 
powers of civil court under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 6; 


(c) other officers of the port to be appointed under sub-section (2) of 
section |8; 


(d) the terms and conditions of service of officers under sub-section (3) 
of section 8; 


(e) the powers to be delegated by the conservator and the persons to 
whom such powers may be delegated under sub-section (6) of section 8; 


(f) the manner of removal or alteration of obstruction and factors for 
determining compensation under sub-section (5) of section 20; 


(g) the qualification, experience and other terms and conditions of service 
of the health officer to be appointed under sub-section (2) of section 24; 


(h) the measures to be taken at infected zone under clause (0) of 
sub-section (4) of section 24; 


(i) the factors to be considered by the conservator in determining the 
expenses to be paid under sub-section (2) of section 26; 


(7) the form and manner of receipt of fees or other charges under 
sub-section (2) of section 48; 


(x) the manner of appointment of conservator from a body of persons 
under sub-section (2) of section 54. 


78. (/) The Central Government in consultation with the State Governments 
may, by notification, and subject to the condition of previous publication, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the form and the manner of notification of any part of the navigable 
rivers or channels leading to ports under sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of 
sub-section (3) of section |; 


23 


Power of State 
Government to 
make rules. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rules in 
consultation 
with State 
Governments. 


24 


Power of 
Council to make 
regulations. 


Power of 
Council to issue 
guidelines. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(b) the norms, form and manner of notifying a new port and 
altering port limits under sub-section (2) of section ]; 


(c) the action to be taken by the conservator and the directions to 
be issued to the persons under clause (a) of sub-section (5) of section 24; 


(d) the manner of reporting of disease by the master under 
clause (0) of sub-section (5) of section 24; 


(e) the conditions subject to which port shall provide reception 
facilities under section 36; 


(f) the form and manner of preparing port waste reception and 
handling plan under sub-section (/) of section 38; 


(g) the information about the port waste reception and handling plan 
and manner of communicating such information under sub-section (3) of 
section 38; 


(A) the form, manner and time for submitting an advance waste 
notice under section 39; 


(7) the conditions for delivery of vessel-generated waste under 
sub-section (/) of section 40; 


(7) the form and manner of issuance of waste delivery receipt under 
sub-section (2) of section 40; 


(k) the intervals and manner of conducting audit of ports under 
sub-section (/) of section 42; 


(/) the manner of reporting incidents under sub-section (/) of 
section 44; 


(m) the form, manner and time for reporting arrival of vessel at 
port under section 49; 


(n) the manner of reporting of incidents under section 67; 


(०) the provision of shore based welfare services under section 68. 


79. (/) The Council may, by notification and subject to the condition of 
previous publication, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the manner and conditions subject to which the Chairperson may 


invite persons to meetings of the Council under sub-section (3) of section 3; 


(b) the manner of transaction of business at meetings of the Council 


under sub-section (4) of section 3; 


(c) any such other matters which is to be, or may be, specified by 


regulations. 


80. (7) The Council may, by notification, issue such guidelines consistent with 
this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such guidelines may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the data or information to be collected and manner of collection, 


storage, updation and submission of such data or information to the Council 
under item (A) of sub-clause (7) of clause (0) of sub-section (/) of section 6; 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


5 of 908. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(b) the manner of dissemination of information, records, data and 
research studies relating to ports, under item (B) of sub-clause (ii) of 
clause (b) of sub-section (/) of section 6; 


(c) the matters in relation to the transparency of port tariff and its 
components under sub-section (4) of section 47; 


(d) such other matters as it may deem fit. 


8. (J) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation 
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation. 


(2) Every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


82. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government 
or the State Government or the Council or the Authority or the employees of the 
Government or the members or employees of the Council or the Authority, in 
respect of anything which is done or intended to be done or any action taken in good 
faith under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder. 


83. (7) The Central Government may, by notification, amend column (4) of 
the Second Schedule, increasing the amount of penalty which shall not exceed more 
than twice the amount of penalty when the Act was first enacted. 


(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (/), shall be laid before each 
House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued. 


84. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


85. (/) The Indian Ports Act, 908 is hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,— 


(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye-law, order or exemption made, 
issued or granted under the Act so repealed shall have effect as if it had been made, 
issued or granted under the provisions of this Act, till new notification, rule, 
regulation, bye-law, order or exemption is made, issued or granted under this Act; 


(b) any office established or created, officer or person appointed and any 
body constituted under the Act so repealed shall continue and shall be deemed 
to have been established, created, appointed or constituted under this Act; 


(c) any document referring to the Act so repealed shall be construed as 
referring to this Act or to the provision of this Act; 


25 


Laying of rules 
and regulations 
before 
Parliament and 
State 
Legislature. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power to amend 
Second 
Schedule. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Repeal and 
savings. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(d) any fine or penalty levied under the Act so repealed may be recovered 
as if it had been levied under this Act; 


(e) any offence committed under the Act so repealed may be prosecuted 
and punished as if it had been committed under this Act; 


(f) any proceeding pending before any court under the Act so repealed 
may be tried or disposed of under the corresponding provisions of this Act; 


(g) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the 
provisions of the Act so repealed shall continue to be proceeded with as if such 
inspection, investigation or inquiry is ordered to be done under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act. 


(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses 
Act, 897, with regard to the effect of repeals. 


[Part H— 


0 of 897. 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


THE FIRST SCHEDULE 


[See section 53(2)] 
Punishment for certain offences 
Serial Offences Section to which Punishment 
No. offence is referred 

() (2) (3) (4) 

l. If any port 0 Fine which may 
commences or carries extend to one lakh 
on operations in rupees and in addition, 
contravention of a fine which may 
section l0 extend to ten thousand 

rupees for every day 
during which _ the 
offence continues 
after conviction. 

2. If any port other 5(3) In case of 
than major port or contravention by port 
port officer fails to officer, fine which 
comply with may extend to ten 
directions of the State thousand rupees and 
Maritime Board in addition, fine not 
under sub-section (3) exceeding one 
of section 5 thousand rupees for 

every day during 
which the offence 
continues after 
conviction. 

In case of 
contravention by port, 
fine which may extend 
to two lakh rupees and 
in addition, fine not 
exceeding twenty 
thousand rupees for 
every day during which 
the offence continues 
after conviction. 

3. If any master of a 27 Imprisonment 
vessel fails to permit which may extend to 
warps or hawsers to be six months or fine 
made fast or let go of which may extend to 
any warps or hawsers one lakh rupees or 
in contravention of both. 
section 27 

4. If master omits to 28 Imprisonment 
take order to which may extend to 
extinguish the fire or six months or fine 
obstructs the which may extend to 
conservator or any one lakh rupees or 
person in both. 
extinguishing or 
attempting to 
extinguish the fire, in 
contravention of 


section 28 


27 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


() (2) (3) (4) 

5. If any person does 29(/) Imprisonment 
or omits to do any act which may extend to 
relating to safety of six months or fine 
vessels in which may extend to 
contravention of one lakh rupees or 
sub-section (/) of both. 
section 29 

6. If the master of the 29(2) Imprisonment 
vessel causes or which may extend to 
suffer any warp or six months or fine 
hawser attached to his which may extend to 
vessel to be left out in one lakh rupees or 
any port in both. 
contravention of 
sub-section (2) 
of section 29 

ie If any person 29(3) Imprisonment 
commits any act in which may extend to 
contravention of six months or fine 
sub-section (3) which may extend to 
of section 29 one lakh rupees or 

both. 

8. If any 30 Imprisonment 
unauthorised person which may extend to 
searches for lost six months or fine 
stores in which may extend to 
contravention of one lakh rupees or 
section 30 both. 

9. If any person 3] Imprisonment 
injures any bank or which may extend to 
shore in six months or fine 
contravention of which may extend to 
section 3| one lakh rupees or 

both. 

0. If any port fails to 36 Fine which may 
provide adequate extend to two lakh 
reception facilities in rupees. 
contravention of 
section 36 

ll. If any port fails to 37 Fine which may 
comply with extend to one lakh 
directions of the rupees and in addition, 
Central Government fine which may extend 
under section 37 to twenty thousand 

rupees for every day 
during which _ the 
offence continues 
after conviction. 

(2: If any port fails to 38(/) Fine which may 
prepare a port waste extend to one 
reception and lakh_ rupees. 
handling plan in 
contravention of 


sub-section (/) of 
section 38 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CQ) (2) (3) (4) 

3. If any port fails to 38(2) Fine which may 
implement the extend to one lakh 
approved port waste rupees. 
reception and 
handling plan in 
contravention of 
sub-section (2) of 
section 38 

4. If any port fails to 38(3) Fine which may 
communicate any extend to twenty 
information to thousand rupees. 
vessels in 
contravention of 
sub-section (3) of 
section 38 

Id; If any port fails to 44(/) Fine which may 
report the particulars extend to one lakh 
of any incident in rupees. 
contravention of 
sub-section (/) of 
section 44 

l6. If any port fails to 44(2) Fine which may 
comply with the extend to one lakh 
directions issued by rupees and in addition, 
the Central fine which may extend 
Government under to ten thousand rupees 
sub-section (2) of for every day during 
section 44 which the offence 

continues after 
conviction. 

7. If any port fails to 66(/) Fine which may 
prepare 98. safety, extend to two lakh 
security, disaster rupees. 
management and 
pollution incident 
emergency 
preparedness and 
response plan in 
contravention of sub- 
section (/) of section 66 

8. If any port fails to 66(4) Fine which may 
comply with — the extend to two lakh 
directions issued by the rupees. 
conservator in 
contravention of sub- 
section (4) of section 66 

[9, If any port fails to 67 Fine which may 
report particulars of extend to one lakh 
any incident in rupees. 
contravention of 
section 67 

20. If any port fails to 68 Fine which may 


provide shore based 
welfare services in 
contravention of 
section 68 


extend to twenty 
thousand rupees. 


29 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


() 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


2. 


22. 


23. 


If any port fails to 
comply with 
directions of the 
Central Government 
issued under 
sub-section (/) of 
section 69 

If any port fails to 
develop or maintain a 
vessel traffic service 
in contravention of 
sub-section (2) of 
section 69 

If any port fails to 
obtain prior clearance 
in contravention of 
section 7] 


6907) 


69(2) 


है| 


Fine which may 
extend to fifty 
thousand rupees. 


Fine which may 
extend to one lakh 
rupees. 


Fine which 
may extend to 
fifty thousand 
rupees. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


THE SECOND SCHEDULE 
[See section 53(3)] 
Penalty for certain contraventions 


Serial No. Contravention Section Penalties 

() (2) (3) (4) 

ie If any person refuses 9 Penalty which may 
or neglects to obey any extend to fifty thousand 
direction of the rupees and in addition, 
conservator issued under penalty not exceeding five 
section l9 thousand rupees for every 

day during which the 
contravention continues 
after conviction. 

2. If any owner has 20 Penalty which may 
without lawful excuse extend to two lakh rupees 
caused any obstruction or and in addition, penalty 
impediment under not exceeding twenty 
section 20 thousand rupees for every 

day during which the 
contravention continues 
after conviction. 

3. If any master of a 22(/) Penalty which may 
vessel or any other extend to one lakh rupees. 
person lifts the buoys or 
moorings without 
assistance of the 
conservator in 
contravention of  sub- 
section (/) of section 22 

4. If the master of the 23 Penalty which may 
vessel, or any person in extend to ten thousand 
possession or occupation rupees for the first offence 
of the building or place, and in addition, penalty 
without lawful excuse, not exceeding ten 
refuses to allow the thousand rupees for every 
conservator or any day during which the 
person to board or enter contravention continues. 
such vessel, building or 
place in contravention of 
section 23 

5: If any person without 26(/) Penalty which may 
lawful excuse, removes, extend to one lakh rupees 
destroys or damages any and in addition, expenses 
property in contravention for any loss, destruction or 
of sub-section (/) of damage suffered by the 
section 26 port, including expenses of 

any inspection or survey 
carried out. 

6. If any owner or master 32(/) Penalty which may 


of a vessel enters, leaves 
or moves in any port in 
contravention of  sub- 
section (/) of section 32 


extend to two lakh rupees. 


|| 


32 


() 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) 


(3) 


(4) 


7. 


0. 


ll. 


2५ 


3. 


4. 


5. 


If any operator, agent or 
master of a vessel fails to 
submit an advance waste 
notice in contravention of 
section 39 

If any master of a 
vessel fails to deliver all 
its vessel-generated 
waste to a _ reception 
facility in contravention 
of sub-section (J) 
of section 40 

If the owner or master 
of any vessel fails to pay 
the charges payable or 
fails to comply with the 
conditions under 
section 4[ 


If any person fails to 
upload information on the 
portal in contravention of 
section 43 

If the Authority or 
concessionaire or person 
or body of persons fails 
to publish the port tariff 
in contravention of sub- 
section (2) of section 47 


If any owner, agent or 
master of a vessel fails to 
report the arrival of a 
vessel in contravention 
of section 49 

If any master of a 
vessel fails to pay any 
fees or other charges in 
contravention of sub- 
section (/) of section 52 


If any person fails to 
furnish or furnishes 


information in 
contravention of 
section 57 


If the master of any 
vessel unlawfully hoists 
or fails to hoist any flag 
in contravention of 
section 65 


39 


40(/) 


4l 


43 


47(2) 


49 


52(/) 


57 


65 


Penalty which may 
extend to twenty thousand 
rupees. 


Penalty which may 
extend to one lakh rupees. 


Penalty which may 
extend to twenty thousand 
rupees and in addition, 
penalty which may extend 
to two thousand rupees for 
every day during which the 
contravention continues. 

Penalty which may 
extend to ten thousand 
rupees. 


Penalty which may 
extend to fifty thousand 
rupees and in addition, 
penalty which may extend 
to five thousand rupees for 
every day during which the 
contravention continues. 

Penalty which may 
extend to twenty thousand 
rupees. 


Penalty which may 
extend to twice the amount 
of fees or other charges 
due, subject to a minimum 
of twenty thousand rupees. 


Penalty which may 
extend to two lakh rupees 
and in addition, penalty 
which may extend to two 
thousand rupees for every 
day during which such 
default continues. 

Penalty which may 
extend to twenty thousand 
rupees. 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
[See section l3(/)] 
State Maritime Boards constituted or established under State Acts 


Serial No. Name of State Name of State Act Date of 
Maritime Board establishment 
() (2) (3) (4) 
l. Gujarat Gujarat Maritime The 3rd 
Maritime Board Board Act, 98l! November, 98] 
(Gujarat Act No. 30 
of 98) 
2; Maharashtra Maharashtra The 4th October, 
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, 996 
996 
(Maharashtra Act 
XV of 997) 
3. Tamil Nadu Tamil Nadu The l8th March, 
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, 997 
995 (Tamil Nadu 
Act No. 4 of 996) 
4. The West West Bengal The Ist October, 
Bengal Maritime Maritime Board Act, 20I5 
Board 2000 (West Bengal 
Act XXX of 2000) 
5; Karnataka Karnataka The 9th 
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, September, 20l9 
20I5 (Karnataka Act 
4] of 20I7) 
6. Kerala Kerala Maritime The 2nd 
Maritime Board Board Act, 20l7 February, 20l8 
(Kerala Act 6 of 
207) 
7. Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh The l6th 
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, December, 209 
208 (Andhra 
Pradesh Act No. l6 of 
209) 
8. Odisha State Odisha State The 28th March, 


Maritime Board 


Maritime Board Act, 
2022 (Odisha Act No. 
0l of 2022) 


2022 


33 


34 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The Indian Ports Act, 908 (the 908 Act) was a pre-independence legislation, 
enacted to consolidate the laws on ports and port-charges. It consisted of provisions 
on the powers of the Central Government and the State Governments for extending 
or withdrawing the applicability of Act and altering port limits, appointment of 
port-officials and their powers and duties, safety and conservation of ports, levy of 
port-dues, fees and other charges, penalties and supplemental provisions. 


2. India has witnessed expansion in the number of operational ports as well 
as the overall traffic being handled at ports. Since the enactment of the 908 Act, 
there have been significant changes in both the commercial operations of ports and 
the international norms for prevention of pollution of ports. In order to facilitate the 
development of the port sector in a planned manner, it was felt necessary to reflect 
the present-day frameworks, incorporate India’s international obligations, address 
emerging environmental concerns and aid the consultative development of the ports 
sector in the national interest. 


3. The proposed legislation seeks to effectively adopt international 
obligations, allowing adequate power to frame subordinate legislation, keeping our 
domestic priorities in mind. It further seeks to integrate development of ports so as to 
utilise India’s coastline in a coherent and sustainable way. It also seeks to reinforce 
and empower the State Maritime Boards to effectively administer, control and manage 
ports other than major ports, within each coastal State and Union territory. 


4. In view of the above, it has become imperative to repeal the Indian Ports 
Act, 908 and to provide for a contemporaneous and dynamic legislation to meet 
the requirements of India as an emerging economy. The Indian Ports Bill, 2025, 
inter alia, seeks to provide for the following, namely:— 


(i) to define the term “appropriate Government” or “Government” and 
clarify that in relation to major ports, means the Central Government; and in 
relation to ports other than major ports, means the State Government; 


(ii) applies to all existing ports to which the provisions of the Indian 
Ports Act, 908 applied; all new ports notified under the Bill; notified parts of 
navigable river or channel which leads to such new port; all vessels within 
port limits; and all aircrafts making use of any part of the port, while on water; 


(iii) the establishment of a body to be notified as Maritime State 
Development Council by the Central Government, which would be 
responsible for making recommendations to the Government, inter alia, 
including, efficient and conducive framework for ports in India; measures for 
growth of the port sector and to promote competition and efficiency in the 
operation of ports; and discharge other functions; 


(iv) to empower the Government to notify a new port or to alter the limits 
of any port; 


(v) to empower the Central Government to formulate a national 
perspective plan for the purposes of maritime trade and to prioritise associated 
infrastructure development of ports; 


(vi) to provide for statutory recognition to State Maritime Boards 
established or constituted by the State Government or body of persons or a 
department of the State Government executing such functions and empower 
the State Maritime Boards with supervisory, developmental and other 
functions for effective administration, control and management of ports other 
than major ports; 


(vii) to provide for the creation of new adjudicatory mechanism which 
requires every State Government to constitute a Dispute Resolution 
Committee, by notification, for the purposes of adjudicating any dispute 
arising between ports other than major ports, concessionaires, port users and 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


port service providers within the State and bars the jurisdiction of civil courts 
from entertaining any matter which the Dispute Resolution Committee is 
empowered to determine under the Bill; 


(viii) powers of conservators have been enlarged, for effective 
superintendence over ports as far as safety and conservation of ports are concerned; 


(ix) to mandate provision of reception facilities in compliance with the 
International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast 
Water and Sediments 2004 and the International Convention for the 
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, !973, including its Protocol of 978; 


(x) to provide for preparation of port waste reception and handling plan 
by each port; 


(xi) to empower Board of Major Port Authority or the board of directors, 
where a major port is a company registered under the Companies Act, 203, 
to fix the port tariff for major ports and to empower the respective State 
Maritime Boards to fix the port tariff for every port other than major port; 


(xii) to provide for preparation of emergency preparedness and response 
plan by each port for the purposes of safety, security, disaster management 
and pollution incidents; 


(xiii) to make provisions for offences and to empower the Judicial 
Magistrate of first class to impose punishment against offences; 


(xiv) to make provisions for penalties and procedure and to empower the 
conservator to impose a penalty against those contraventions; 


(xv) to empower the Central Government to direct ports to adopt 
mechanism for electronically integrating port related data; 


(xvi) requirement of prior clearance from the Central Government when 
a port is undergoing change in substantial ownership or effective control; 


(xvii) classification of a major port or a port other than major port as a 
mega port by notification, when such port fulfils the criteria notified by the 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government; 


(xviii) to clarify that the Bill is in addition, and not in derogation to 
existing legislations such as the Major Port Authorities Act, 202] and the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 958; 


(xix) to empower the Central Government to make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill, as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient, for removing the difficulty before the expiry of a period of three 
years from the date of commencement of the Bill; 


(xx) to repeal the Indian Ports Act, 908 and to provide for saving of 
certain actions taken thereunder. 


5. | The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained 


in the Bill. 


6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; SARBANANDA SONOWAL. 
The \8th March, 2025. 


35 


36 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Notes on clauses 


Clause |.—This clause seeks to provide for short title, extent, commencement 
and application of the Bill. It specifies the application of the Bill, inter alia, to all 
ports, parts of the navigable rivers and channels leading to such ports as may be 
notified by the Government, all vessels within port limits and all aircrafts making 
use of any port while on water. It also specifies the vessels to which the Bill shall 
not be applicable, which include any port or navigable rivers or channels or vessels 
or classes of vessels, any vessel or any aircraft making use of any part of the port 
belonging to or exclusively servicing, for military or non-commercial service of the 
Government, the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, customs authorities, Central 
Armed Forces and police and other agencies as may be notified by the Central 
Government; any vessel belonging to or in service of the Central Government or 
State Government, or any foreign vessel of war. 


Clause 2.—This clause defines the various expressions used in the Bill which, 
inter alia, include “appropriate Government” or “Government”, “concessionaire”, 
“existing port’, “mega port”, “mooring”, “new port”, “port”, “port limits”, 
“port tariff’, “port works”, “State”, “State Maritime Board”, “Schedule”, 
“security” and “vessel”. 


Clause 3 —This clause seeks to provide for the establishment of the Maritime 
State Development Council with the Union Minister of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways, Government of India, as Chairperson and other members namely, the 
Minister in-charge of ports of each State; Minister-in-charge of the Union territory 
of Puducherry and Administrators of all coastal Union territories; the Secretary or 
equivalent rank to the Government of India in the Indian Navy dealing with coastal 
security nominated by the Central Government in the Ministry of Defence; the 
Secretary or equivalent rank to the Government of India in the Indian Coast Guard 
dealing with coastal security nominated by the Central Government in the Ministry 
of Defence and the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways as the Member Secretary. The office of the member of the 
Council is not deemed to be an office of profit. 


Clause 4—This clause empowers the Chairperson with the general 
superintendence and directions in the conduct of affairs of the Council. 


Clause 5.—This clause seeks to provide that no act or proceeding of the 
Council shall be invalidated merely because of any vacancy in the Council, or any 
defect in the constitution of the Council, or any defect in the appointment of a 
member or any irregularity in the Council’s procedure provided such irregularity 
does not affect the merits of the case. 


Clause 6.—This clause seeks to specify the functions of the Council which, 
inter alia, include making recommendations to the Government on the matters 
specified therein; issuing guidelines, in consultation with the Central Government 
and the State Governments on matters specified therein; and calling for information 
from any Authority or port or person, for the purpose of discharging its functions. 


Clause 7—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make 
officers and employees available for discharge of the functions of the Council. It 
further empowers the Central Government to prescribe salaries, allowances, and 
conditions of service of the employees of the Council. 


Clause 8.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make 
grants to the Council of such sums of money required by it to discharge its functions 
under this Bill. 


Clause 9.—This clause seeks to empower the Council to delegate its powers 
and functions subject to any conditions by general or special order in writing to any 
member or employee of the Council, except the power to make regulations or to 
issue guidelines. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 0.—This clause seeks to disallow any port from commencing or 
carrying on activities unless it is an existing port or a new port which is duly notified 
in accordance with clause !]. 


Clause |!.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to notify 
a new port and to alter the limits of any port. It further provides that the notification 
which alters the limits of any port shall not have retrospective effect. The clause also 
empowers the Central Government in consultation with the State Government to 
prescribe the norms, form and manner for declaring a new port and for altering the 
port limits. 


Clause |2.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
formulate a national perspective plan for the purpose of maritime trade and to 
prioritise associated infrastructure development. It provides that the Central 
Government, State Governments and the Authority shall endeavour to adhere to the 
national perspective plan formulated by the Central Government and guidelines 
issued by the Council. 


Clause |3.—This clause provides that every State Maritime Board established 
or constituted by the State Government under any of the enactments specified in the 
Third Schedule shall be deemed to be duly established or constituted under this Bill. 
It provides where such State Maritime Board is not established or constituted, the 
State Governments are obligated to establish and notify State Maritime Board. The 
State Maritime Board shall be a distinct legal entity, having the power, subject to 
the provisions of the Bill to contract, acquire, hold and dispose of property, to sue 
or be sued. The State Government may specify by notification, the place where the 
head office of the State Maritime Board shall be situated. 


Clause |4.—This clause provides for transfer of assets and liabilities by the 
State Government to the State Maritime Board. It provides that on and from the date 
of establishment or the date of notification of the State Maritime Board, the State 
Government shall transfer to the State Maritime Board and vest all port land, 
property, assets, funds, interest in the property and all rights to levy rates, fee and 
other sums of money vested or due in the State Government. It further provides that 
all debts, obligations, contracts, and legal proceedings of the State Government 
before the establishment or notification of the State Maritime Board shall be 
transferred to the State Maritime Board. The State Maritime Board will continue all 
suits or other legal proceedings initiated, on behalf or against the State Government. 


Clause |5.—This clause specifies the various functions of the State Maritime 
Board with respect to all the ports other than major ports within the territory of the 
respective State, which, inter alia, include, initiating plans for development of ports; 
promoting the use, development and improvement of ports; developing new ports, 
subject to security clearance as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government. 
It further seeks to empower the State Maritime Board to issue directions to any port 
other than major port or to any officer of such port for discharging its functions 
under the Bill. 


Clause !6.—This clause seeks to mandate every State Government to 
constitute by notification, a Dispute Resolution Committee consisting of not less 
than three members, to adjudicate disputes between ports other than major ports, 
concessionaires, port users and port service providers, unless the parties have agreed 
to arbitration or any other dispute resolution mechanism. The time limit for deciding 
any dispute is six months, which may be extended up to three more months at a time 
after recording reasons for doing so, but not exceeding twelve months. It further 
confers the Dispute Resolution Committee with the powers of a civil court. This 
clause also provides that any party aggrieved by an order of the Dispute Resolution 
Committee may prefer an appeal to the High Court of the appropriate jurisdiction, 
within sixty days from the date on which a copy of the order is received by the party. 


37 


38 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause |7.—This clause seeks to bar the jurisdiction of any civil court to 
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Dispute 
Resolution Committee is empowered by or under this Bill to determine. 


Clause |8.—This clause seeks to provide for the appointment of conservator 
for every port or for two or more ports by the Government, and the conservator shall 
be subject to the control of the Government and the Authority. It further mandates 
every port to appoint a harbour master or such other officers of the port as may be 
prescribed by rules made by the Government. All officers operating in a port shall 
be subject to the supervision and control of the conservator. It also empowers the 
conservator, with the approval of the Government, to delegate such powers to such 
persons, as may be prescribed by rules made by the Government. 


Clause |9.—This clause empowers the conservator to issue directions to any 
vessel within the port for carrying out the provisions of this Bill or the rules made 
thereunder, which, inter alia, include the berthing, mooring, anchoring of a vessel; 
removal of a vessel from any place within the port and the time period within which 
the same shall be done; regulate, restrict or prohibit the movement of vessels, direct 
the master of the vessel to have adequate crew members; prohibit any vessel from 
entering or leaving the port; or endangering the safety of any vessel in the port. It 
further empowers the conservator to take any action and hold such person liable for 
reimbursement of all expenses incurred in order to give effect to the directions in 
case person refuses or neglects to obey with any directions of the conservator. 


Clause 20.—This clause empowers the conservator to remove directly or 
through another agency or port officer, any obstruction in the operation of a port or 
part thereof of the port or any other work. It further requires the owner of such 
obstruction to pay reasonable expenses incurred in such removal, however, if the 
owner evades such payment, public auction of the object causing obstruction may 
be conducted to recover the expenses and excess proceeds or part of the obstruction 
shall be returned to the owner or deposited in the manner the Government may 
direct. If the storage of the obstruction incurs expenses, the same may be recovered 
by a further sale of the remaining unsold obstruction. This clause also states that in 
case of an impediment sought to be removed by the conservator exists on account 
of permission from the Government, the conservator shall obtain prior sanction for 
removal from the Government. The owner of the obstruction in this case shall 
receive due compensation contingent on factors prescribed by rules made by the 
appropriate Government. 


Clause 2.—This clause seeks to empower the Government to specify by 
notification, the restrictions on certain activities within port limits that may cause 
any impediment to the navigation in a port. 


Clause 22.—This clause restricts the master of the vessel, except in the case 
of an emergency, from lifting any buoy or mooring in a port, laid down by the 
conservator, without the conservator’s assistance where such vessel hooks or gets 
foul. It further provides that conservator, immediately on receiving notice of any 
such emergency under this clause, shall assist and superintend the clearing of such 
vessel. This clause also puts an obligation on the vessel master to pay for the 
reasonable expenses incurred in clearing the same. 


Clause 23.—This clause empowers the conservator, either alone or with any 
other person or body of person to board any vessel or enter any building or place 
within port limits to board any vessel, or enter any building or place whenever is it 
necessary for performance of duties under the Bill. This clause prevents a master of 
a vessel or any person in possession or occupation of the building or place, from 
disallowing boarding such vessel or entering such building or place without lawful 
excuse. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 24.—This clause empowers the Government to appoint an empanelled 
medical practitioner as a health officer to undertake the functions of a port 
health-officer at any port to, inter alia, inspect water, sanitation and accommodation 
facilities of a vessel, board any vessel and medically examine any person on the 
vessel as well as enforce production of any document to inquire into the health and 
medical conditions of any person on the vessel. This clause further empowers the 
Government to declare any port or part thereof an infected zone when any infectious 
or contagious disease has broken out, or is reasonably suspected to break out and 
prescribe measures to be taken. This clause also empowers the conservator to take 
actions and pass directions for prevention or containment of any disease in vessels 
arriving at or being in port. The master shall report the particulars of any such 
disease in such vessels to either the Government or the conservator. It also 
empowers the health officer along with such person or body of persons authorised 
by the Government, to board the vessel for medical inspection of either the vessel 
or any person on vessel. 


Clause 25.—This clause provides indemnity to the Government from any act 
or default of any conservator, harbour master or any other port officers, their 
deputies or assistants of authorities in any port or any person acting under the control 
or direction of any authority or their assistant or any act or default of any pilot or for 
any damage caused to the vessel due to any defect in the moorings, hawsers or any 
other thing belonging to the Government. This clause further provides that the 
provision does not apply to any suit against the Government on any act done under 
any order or sanction of the Government. 


Clause 26.—This clause bars any person, without lawful excuse, from 
removing, destroying or damaging any property including pier or wharf which 
belongs to, in custody or in the possession of the port or hinder or prevent the 
operation of any such property. This clause obligates any person who contravenes 
the provision to pay for any loss, destruction or damage suffered by the port which 
also includes the cost of inspection or survey, in addition to any other penalty as 
specified under the Second Schedule of the Bill. 


Clause 27.—This clause obligates the master of any vessel to allow warps or 
hawsers to be fastened to the vessel for warping another vessel in the port, as and 
when required by the conservator and to not let go off such warp or hawser until 
directed by the conservator to do so. 


Clause 28.—This clause seeks to impose an obligation on the master of the 
vessel to co-operate with and take orders from, the conservator or any person 
authorised by the conservator, to extinguish any fire on the vessel. 


Clause 29.—This clause seeks to bar a person on a vessel from various actions 
that impact the safety of the vessel and its surroundings, including inter 
alia, wilfully loosening or removing the moorings from a vessel without 
being authorised to do so, lifting, injuring or making a vessel fast to loosen or 
set adrift any moorings, buoys, beacons or sea or landmarks or discharges any 
firearm in the port or commits an action or abstains from one which causes or 
may cause fire on board a vessel or uses a vessel in state of defective condition, 
which makes the life of any person or the safety of another vessel, likely to be 
endangered. This clause further states that the master of a vessel shall not leave a 
warp or hawser attached to his vessel, in the port, causing danger to the safety of 
another vessel in the port. It also prohibits commission of any act in relation to 
any combustible matter which is prohibited by the Government or contrary to 
the orders or directions of the conservator. 


Clause 30.—This clause prohibits any person from creeping or sweeping for 
anchors, cables without the conservator’s permission. 


39 


40 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 3|—This clause bars any person from disturbing the existing 
waterbed or geophysical structures or any kind of artificial protection or shore of 
the port without the conservator’s permission and under the supervision of such 
person as may be appointed by the conservator. It further bars any person from 
sinking or burying any mooring-post, anchor or any other thing or do anything 
which may damage any part of the bank or shore. 


Clause 32.—This clause seeks to mandate that vessels shall not leave or move 
in any port without a pilot, harbour master or port officer on board the vessel, unless 
the vessel has the conservator’s written permission unless upon application to the 
proper officer, the master was unable to procure a pilot, harbour master or port 
officer to go on board the vessel. This clause empowers the Government to specify 
by notification that this clause will not apply to sailing vessels of any measurement 
not exceeding a measurement specified in the notification. This clause also provide 
that the owner or master of the vessel shall be answerable for any damage caused 
by the vessel or fault of navigation of the vessel. 


Clause 33.—This clause directs every port officer in a port to co-operate with 
any officer authorised by a general or special order of the Central Government for 
carrying out any manoeuvres which is part of any scheme or preparations for the 
defence of the port during time of war, or for the security of the port from any 
sub-conventional or non-traditional threats, or natural disasters. This clause further 
puts an obligation on the Government to bear the running expenses of such vessels 
which are used during time of war. 


Clause 34.—This clause provides for the Authority and Director General to 
regulate certain activities specified therein. 


Clause 35.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions which are specific 
to Chapter VII, such as “Ballast Water Management Convention”, “MARPOL 


99 ६६ 99 66. 995 66 


Convention”, “reception facility”, “waste from vessels”, “cargo residues”. 


Clause 36.—This clause seeks to mandate every port to provide reception 
facilities adequate to meet the needs of vessels normally using a port without 
causing undue delay to vessels, in order to comply with the requirements of relevant 
provisions in the MARPOL Convention and the Ballast Water Management 
Convention. Further, this clause explains the term “adequate” as capable of 
receiving the types and quantities of wastes from vessels normally using that port, 
taking into account the operational needs of the port users, its size and geographical 
location, the types of vessels calling there. 


Clause 37—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to 
mandate any port, by way of a written order, which has no reception facility or 
whose facilities are not “adequate”, on the basis of an audit conducted or otherwise, 
to provide or arrange the reception facilities specified in the order. 


Clause 38.—This clause requires every port to prepare a port waste reception 
and handling plan as prescribed by rules made by the Central Government in 
consultation with the State Government. The port waste reception and handling plan 
approved by the Central Government is required to be implemented by the port. This 
clause further mandates every port to communicate information about the plan to 
the vessels in the manner prescribed by rules. 


Clause 39.—This clause seeks to obligate the operator, agent or master of a 
vessel bound for India to submit an advance waste notification to the port of call in 
the form and manner and within the time period prescribed by rules made by the 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government. 


Clause 40.—This clause seeks to obligate the master of a vessel calling at a 
port, to deliver all its vessel generated waste to a reception facility, as per the 
conditions prescribed by rules. It requires the port where the waste is delivered to 
issue a waste delivery receipt to the master of the vessel in the form and manner 
prescribed by rules. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 4 78 clause seeks to empower a port providing reception facilities 
or person providing such facilities, to levy reasonable charges for use of the 
reception facilities. On payment of all charges and subject to compliance with all 
conditions imposed, any reception facility provided at the port shall be made 
available for use by any vessel. 


Clause 42.—This clause requires the Central Government to audit every port 
for the availability and adequacy of reception facilities and also audit such pollution 
containment equipment as may be specified by the Central Government, at such 
intervals, and in the manner prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the State Government. 


Clause 43.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to specify 
by notification the manner in which and the person by whom the information will 
be uploaded on the Portal. This includes advance waste notification as specified 
under clause 39; waste delivery receipts under sub-clause (2) of clause 40; request 
by a vessel for availing reception facilities and such other matters. 


Clause 44.—This clause seeks to obligate every port to report to the 
Government, any incident that threatens or is likely to pose a threat of pollution to 
the coastal waters, in the manner prescribed by rules. It further empowers the 
Central Government to issue appropriate directions to any port or State Government 
or Authority or organisation, in case it is satisfied that an incident which threatens 
or is likely to pose a threat of pollution of the coastal waters has taken place or is 
likely to take place, to prevent or contain such pollution in accordance with 
applicable law. It also explains the meaning of coastal waters for the purposes of 
this clause. 


Clause 45.—This clause seeks to empower the Government to issue 
appropriate directions to any port or port officer to ensure compliance with any of 
the provisions of Chapter VIII. 


Clause 46.—This clause specifies fee and other charges which shall be 
leviable in ports. 


Clause 47.—This clause seeks to authorise the State Maritime Board or an 
authorised concessionaire to fix the port tariff for every port other than major port. 
Further, the Board of Major Port Authority or such person or body of persons 
authorised by the Board of Major Port Authority or board of directors where port is 
registered as a company under the Companies Act, 203 will fix the port tariff for 
every major port. The port tariff fixed shall be published electronically and shall 
come into effect after expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of its 
publication. This clause also allows the Council to issue guidelines on any matter 
related to transparency of port tariff including its components. It further empowers 
the Authority on the basis of recommendations by the Government to exempt or 
remit the whole or any portion of fee or other charges payable under the Bill. 


Clause 48.—This clause empowers Government to authorise by way of 
notification, an officer or body of persons at the port, to receive the fees or other 
charges payable under the Bill and to expend the receipts as may be specified in the 
notification. It requires such officer or body of persons to issue receipts in lieu of 
such fee or other charges. These receipts shall contain the particulars as specified 
under this clause. 


Clause 49.—This clause obligates the owner, agent or master of every vessel 
required to pay any fee or other charges, to report the vessel’s arrival within port 
limits in such form, manner and within such period as may be prescribed by rules. 


4l 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 50.—This clause empowers the officer or body of persons authorised 
under sub-clause (/) of clause 48, to detain or arrest the vessel, if the master of any 
vessel refuses or neglects to pay fees and other charges on demand, until such 
amount is paid. It further empowers the officer or body of persons to sell off the 
detained or arrested vessel to recover the costs if the fees or other charges remain 
unpaid for fifteen days. In cases where a vessel is already arrested under the order 
of a court or other authority, prior permission of such court or the authority must be 
taken to make the sale and disburse the surplus according to guidelines. This clause 
also covers conditions in which the sale proceeds of the vessel are insufficient to 
satisfy the fee or other charges. 


Clause 5|.—This clause mandates that the port-clearance shall not be granted 
to any vessel until the amount of fees or other charges and fines, penalties and 
expenses have been paid by the owner or master or agent or port user, to the 
satisfaction of the officer granting the clearance. 


Clause 52.—This clause mandates that no vessel master shall evade the 
payment of fees or other charges, liable to be paid under the Bill. It further states 
that in any proceeding before a Magistrate any document issued stating that the 
master has evaded such payments, shall be sufficient prima facie proof of the 
evasion, unless the master can prove that such a departure happened due to the stress 
of weather, or there was a lawful and reasonable ground for such departure. Any 
Magistrate having jurisdiction under this Bill, in any port to which the vessel may 
proceed, or on which she may be found shall have jurisdiction in any proceeding 
under this clause. 


Clause 53.—This clause states that any person who contravenes any provision 
or fails to comply with any provision of the Bill shall be liable to penalty. The First 
Schedule pertains to offences for which fines or imprisonment is specified and the 
Second Schedule pertains to contraventions for which penalties have been specified. 
This clause seeks to specify that any contravention or failure to comply with the 
provisions of the Bill, rules or regulations under the Bill which do not have a 
separate penalty, shall be punishable with a fine up to ten thousand rupees, and if 
the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees for every day, after the first day, during which the breach continues. 


Clause 54.—This clause specifies that the authority for imposing the penalty 
for contravention specified in the table under the Second Schedule will be the 
conservator. It further empowers the Central Government to notify an officer to 
compound first contravention of any provision under the Bill. 


Clause 55.—This clause specifies that no court inferior to that of a Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence specified in the First Schedule 
under the Bill. 


Clause 56.—This clause seeks to specify the penalty for wilful failure to 
comply with any order of the Dispute Resolution Committee. Where no appeal has 
been preferred against such order of the Dispute Resolution Committee, penalty 
extending up to one lakh rupees with an additional penalty of one thousand rupees 
each day for continuing default shall be imposed. 


Clause 57.—This clause provides that no person shall make any statement or 
furnish any document which the person knows or has reason to believe to be false 
in any material particular or omit to state any material fact knowing it to be material, 
or wilfully alter, suppress or destroy any document which is required to be 
furnished. 


Clause 58.—This clause states that any fine imposed by the Magistrate or 
penalty imposed by the conservator, may be recovered by distress and sale of vessel 
or part of vessel, as may be deemed necessary. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 59 —This clause states that if any dispute as to the sum to be paid as 
expenses or damages under this Bill arises, it shall be determined by the Magistrate, 
upon application made to him for that purpose by either of the disrupting parties. 
Further, any sum payable as expenses or damages under the Bill that do not exceed 
twenty thousand rupees, may be recovered by the conservator or Magistrate as if it 
were a penalty or fine. 


Clause 60.—This clause seeks to provide that the cost of distress or sale may 
be levied in addition to any penalty, fine, expenses or damages. 


Clause 6|.—This clause seeks to provide that in case of any dispute about the 
amount leviable by any distress or arrest under the Bill and costs payable for distress, 
the person making the distress or arrest may detain the goods and proceeds of the 
sale until the Magistrate determines the amount to be levied. Such amount shall be 
determined by the Magistrate pursuant to an application made to him in that regard 
to be paid as costs, which if not paid on demand shall be enforced as a fine. 


Clause 62.—This clause seeks to provide that any person committing any 
offence under the Bill or the corresponding rules may be tried at a place in which he 
may be found, or by any Magistrate having jurisdiction over the district or place 
adjoining the port where the offence has taken place, or in any court where the 
person might be tried under any other law for the time being in force. All powers of 
a Magistrate under the Bill shall be exercised by such Magistrate in such manner as 
if the offence had been committed under his jurisdiction even if the same was 
committed outside the limits of his jurisdiction. 


Clause 63.—This clause seeks to provide that in case the person committing 
an offence under the Bill is a company, every person who, at the time the offence 
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the 
conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. If such 
person proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence, such person 
need not to be subject to punishment. However, if it is proved that the offence was 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect, such 
person shall be punished accordingly. This clause also explains the meaning of 
“company” and “director” for this clause. 


Clause 64.—This clause seeks to provide the manner of service of documents 
on any person, such as, personal delivery, leaving the same at his last place of 
residence, or by post. If such delivery is to be made to the harbour master of a port, 
it may be left at the port or with a person in command at the port; in case of a master 
of a vessel, such document may be left on board with person in command of the 
vessel and if no master or owner or agent is there, it may be affixed on the vessel or 
at a suitable place on the bridge. 


Clause 65.—This clause prohibits vessels from hoisting, carrying or wearing 
any flag, jack, pennant or colours at any port, the use of which is unlawful. It further 
imposes an obligation on foreign vessels to hoist the flag of Republic of India and 
the flag of the country of the vessel while calling at a port in India. 


Clause 66.—This clause mandates every port to prepare emergency 
preparedness and response plan. It further empowers the Central Government to 
approve such a plan as well as to audit the port to ensure compliance with this clause. 
This clause also empowers the conservator to issue directions for the 
implementation of the approved plan. It also empowers the Central Government to 
issue directions to any person in order to ensure compliance with this clause and put 
in place a national emergency response mechanism. 


43 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 67—This clause imposes an obligation on every port to report the 
particulars of any incident such as property damage, sinking of vessels, collision of 
vessels, fire, in such manner as may be prescribed by rules. 


Clause 68.—This clause obligates every port to provide shore-based welfare 
services for seafarers of vessels calling at the port, as may be prescribed by rules. 


Clause 69.—This clause empowers the Central Government to direct a port to 
adopt a mechanism for electronically integrating such port related data with the port 
community system. It further obligates every port to maintain an effective vessel 
traffic service within port limits in accordance with applicable law. This clause also 
explains the meaning of port community system and vessel traffic system. 


Clause 70.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue 
directions to port, port facilities, port officer or any person, to ensure compliance 
with provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 958. 


Clause 7\.—This clause seeks to require any port undergoing a change in 
substantial ownership or effective control, to obtain prior clearance from the Central 
Government or a person authorised by the Central Government, in such form and 
manner and within such time as may be notified. 


Clause 72.—This clause mandates that obligations under the international 
conventions to which India is a party are discharged in accordance with such 
conventions, as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government. 


Clause 73.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government, in 
consultation with the State Government, to specify by notification the criteria for 
classification of one or more port as a mega port. It further empowers the Central 
Government in the case of a major port, and in consultation with the State 
Government in the case of a port other than major port, to notify a port as a mega 
port. Irrespective of such classification as a mega port, such major port a port other 
than major port shall retain its status and continue to be governed by the respective 
laws applicable to them. 


Clause 74.—This clause seeks to provide that all members, officers and other 
employees of the Maritime State Development Council when acting in pursuance of 
the provisions of the Bill shall be deemed to be public servants under clause (28) of 
section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


Clause 75.—This clause mandates that the provisions of the Bill shall be in 
addition to and not in derogation of the Major Port Authorities Act, 202l and 
Merchant Shipping Act, 958, in so far as it relates to ports. 


Clause 76.—This clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the 
Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 77.—This clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the State 
Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 78.—This clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the 
Central Government in consultation with the State Government make rules to carry 
out the purpose of the Bill. 


Clause 79.—This clause seeks to enumerates the matters in respect of which 
the Council may make regulations governing its administrative functioning of ports. 


Clause 80.—This clause seeks to enumerates the matters in respect of which 
the Council may frame guidelines consistent with the Bill and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Bill. 


Clause 8 | 75 clause mandates that every rule and every regulation made 
under the Bill shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. It further provides 
that every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as it is made, 
before the State Legislature. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Clause 82.—This clause seeks to protect the Government, the Council, the 
Authority or any member or any employee of the Council or the Authority from any 
suit or other legal proceedings for an action done in good faith under the Bill, or any 
rules or any regulations made under the Bill. 


Clause 83.—This clause empowers the Central Government to notify and 
increase the amount of penalty specified in the Second Schedule, not exceeding, 
twice the amount that has been specified. It further provides that each notification 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as after it is issued. 


Clause 84.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make, 
by order published in the Official Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties in 
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill and restrict the power to make such order 
within a period of three years from the commencement of the Bill and mandates 
every such order to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


Clause 85.—This clause seeks to repeal the Indian Ports Act, 908 and to 
provide for the saving of various actions undertaken under the said Act. It further 
states that provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, |897 shall be 
applicable to the repealed enactment. 


45 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The Bill seeks to repeal the Indian Ports Act, |908 and to introduce the Indian 
Ports Bill, 2025. 


2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a Council, for 
the purposes of this Bill to be called the Maritime State Development Council. 
Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament, make grants as required by the Maritime State 
Development Council, to discharge its functions under this Bill. 


3. The expenditure to be incurred towards the said body would be met from 
budgetary allocation after such allocation by the Department of Expenditure, as and 
when the body will be constituted. This expenditure is not quantifiable at this stage 
as the structure, posts, number of officers and other aspects are not final. 


4. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any other expenditure, either recurring 
or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


[Part H— 


SEc. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 76 of the Indian Ports Bill, 2025 seeks to empower the Central 
Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill, subject to the 
condition of previous publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the 
matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters include, (7) the 
salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the employees of the 
Council under sub-clause (2) of clause 7; (ii) other officers of the port to be 
appointed under sub-clause (2) of clause |8; (iii) the terms and conditions of service 
of the officers under sub-clause (3) of clause 8; (iv) the powers to be delegated by 
the conservator and the persons to whom such powers may be delegated under sub- 
clause (6) of clause 8; (v) the manner of removal or alteration of obstruction and 
factors for determining compensation under sub-clause (5) of clause 20; (vi) the 
qualifications, experience and other terms and conditions of service of the health 
officer to be appointed under sub-clause (2) of clause 24; (vii) the measures to be 
taken at infected zone under sub-clause (4) (0) of clause 24; (गा) the factors to be 
considered by the conservator in determining the expenses to be paid by under sub- 
clause (2) of clause 26; (ix) the form and manner of receipt of fees or other charges 
under sub-clause (2) of clause 48; (x) the manner of appointment of conservator 
from a body of persons under sub-clause (2) of clause 54; and (x/) the obligations to 
be discharged by the ports under clause 72. 


2. Clause 77 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Government to make rules 
to carry out the provisions of the Bill, subject to the condition of previous 
publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of 
which such rules may be made. These matters include, (7) the form and manner of 
making an application for adjudication of disputes referred to the State Maritime 
Board under sub-clause (2) of clause 6; (ii) other matters in respect of which the 
State Maritime Board shall exercise powers of civil court under sub-clause (4) (d) 
of clause 6; (iii) other officers of the port to be appointed under sub-clause (2) of 
clause 8; (iv) the terms and conditions of service of officers under sub-clause (3) 
of clause 8; (v) the powers to be delegated by the conservator and the persons to 
whom such powers may be delegated sub-clause (6) of clause 8; (vi) the manner 
of removal or alteration of obstruction and factors for determining compensation 
under sub-clause (5) of clause 20; (vii) the qualification, experience and other terms 
and conditions of service of the health officer to be appointed under sub-clause (2) 
of clause 24; (viii) the measures to be taken at infected zone under sub-clause (4) 
(b) of clause 24; (ix) the factors to be considered by the conservator in determining 
the expenses to be paid under sub-clause (2) of clause 26; (x) the form and manner 
of receipt of fees or other charges under sub-clause (2) of clause 48; and (x/) the 
manner of appointment of conservator from a body of persons under sub-clause (2) 
of clause 54. 


3. Clause 78 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government in 
consultation with State Governments to make rules, to carry out the provisions of 
the Bill, subject to the condition of previous publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said 
clause specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters 
include, (४) the form and manner of notification of any part of the navigable rivers 
or channels leading to ports under sub-clause (3) (a) (॥) of clause |; (77) the norms, 
form and manner of notifying a new port and altering port limits under sub-clause 
(2) of clause ; (iii) the action to be taken by the conservator and the directions to 
be issued to the persons sub-clause (5) (a) of clause 24; (iv) the manner of reporting 
of disease by the master under sub-clause (5) (6) of clause 24; (v) the conditions 
subject to which port shall provide reception facilities under clause 36; (vi) the form 
and manner of preparing port waste reception and handling plan under sub-clause 
(/) of clause 38; (vii) the information about the port waste reception and handling 
plan and manner of communicating such information under sub-clause (3) of 
clause 38; (viii) the form, manner and time for submitting an advance waste notice 
under clause 39; (ix) the conditions for delivery of vessel-generated waste under 


47 


48 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. 2] 


sub-clause (/) of clause 40; (x) the form and manner of issuance of waste delivery 
receipt under sub-clause (2) of clause 40; (x/) the intervals and manner of conducting 
audit of ports under sub-clause (/) of clause 42; (xii) the manner of reporting 
incidents under sub-clause (/) of clause 44; (xiii) the form, manner and time for 
reporting arrival of vessel at port under clause 49; (xiv) the manner of reporting of 
incidents under clause 67; and (xv) the provisions of shore-based welfare services 
under clause 68. 


4. Clause 79 of the Bill seeks to empower the Maritime State Development 
Council to make regulations, to carry out the provisions of the Bill, subject to the 
condition of previous publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the 
matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters include, (7) the manner 
and conditions subject to which the Chairperson may invite persons to meetings of 
the Council under sub-clause (3) of clause 3; (i) the manner of transaction of 
business at meetings of the Council under sub-clause (4) of clause 3; and (iii) any 
such other matters which is to be, or may be, specified by regulations. 


5. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules and regulations 
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative details, and as such, it is 
not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH 
Secretary General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 
MGIPMRND—764GI(S4)—28-3-2025. KSHITIZinee 
MOHAN bate: 2025.03.29 


07:78:09 +05'30' 


