रजिस्ट्री te डी० एल० -(एन)04/0007/2003--25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25 


JN क Ista 
The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-13082025-265409 
CG-DL-E-13082025-265409 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग वा — खण्ड 1 
PART II — Section 1 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 26] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, अगस्त 13, 2025/श्रावण 22, 1947 (शक) 
No. 26] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 13, 2025/SHRAVANA 22, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 13th August, 2025/Shravana 22, 1947 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
13th August, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:— 

THE READJUSTMENT OF REPRESENTATION OF 
SCHEDULED TRIBES IN ASSEMBLY CONSTITUENCIES OF 
THE STATE OF GOA ACT, 2025 
No. 21 oF 2025 

[13th August, 2025.] 


An Act for enabling reservation of seats in accordance with article 332 of 
the Constitution for effective democratic participation of members of 
Scheduled Tribes and to provide for the readjustment of seats in the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa, in so far as such readjust- 
ment is necessitated by inclusion of certain communities in the list 
of the Scheduled ribes in the State of Goa and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Readjustment of Representation of 
Scheduled Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Census Commissioner” means the Census Commissioner appointed 
37 of 1948. under sub-section (/) of section 4 of the Census Act, 1948; 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Estimation of 
population of 
Scheduled 
Tribes. 


Readjustment of 
seats by 
Commission. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(0) “Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in 
article 324 of the Constitution; 


(2) “Delimitation Act” means the Delimitation Act, 2002; 


(d) “Delimitation Order” means the Delimitation of Parliamentary and 
Assembly Constituencies Order, 2008; 


(e) “last census” means the census held in India in 2001; 


(f) “Scheduled Tribes Orders” means the Constitution (Scheduled 
Tribes) Order, 1950, and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) (Union 
Territories) Order, 1951, as amended from time to time, made by the President 
under article 342 of the Constitution; 


(g) “State” means the State of Goa. 


3. (1) As soon as may be after the commencement of this Act, the population 
as at the last census of the Scheduled Tribes in the State shall be ascertained or 
estimated by the Census Commissioner. 


(2) Where by reason of the amendments made in the Scheduled Tribes 
Orders after the last census and up to the date of commencement of this Act, the 
population of the Scheduled Tribes as at the last census is varied in the State, the 
Census Commissioner shall ascertain or estimate as on the date of such 
commencement, the population of the Scheduled Tribes so varied, and also 
ascertain or estimate the proportion of such population of the Scheduled Tribes to 
the total population of the State. 


(3) The population figures ascertained or estimated under sub-section (2) shall 
be notified by the Census Commissioner in the Gazette of India. 


(4) The population figures so notified shall be taken to be the relevant 
population figures and shall replace any figures previously published as ascertained 
or estimated at the last census; and the figures so notified shall be final and shall not 
be called in question in any court. 


4. (J) After the population figures have been notified for the State under 
section 3, the Commission shall make such amendments as may be necessary in the 
Delimitation Order, having regard to the provisions of articles 170 and 332 of the 
Constitution, of section 8 of the Delimitation Act, and of this Act, for the purpose 
of giving proper representation to the Scheduled Tribes of the State, and the Second 
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 shall be deemed to have 
been amended accordingly. 


(2) In making any amendments in the Delimitation Order under 
sub-section (/), the Commission shall, as far as may be necessary, have regard to 
the provisions of clause (d) of sub-section (/) of section 9 of the Delimitation Act. 


(3) The Commission shall— 


(a) publish its proposals for the amendments in the Gazette of India and 
the Official Gazette of the State and also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 


(0) specify a date on or after which such proposals will be further 
considered by it; 


(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been 
received by it before the date so specified and for such consideration hold one 
or more public sittings at such place or places in the State as it thinks fit; and 


(d) thereafter make necessary amendments in the Delimitation Order. 


[Part II— 


33 of 2002. 


C.O. 19. 
C. O. 32. 


43 of 1950. 


Sec. 1] 


5 of 1908. 


46 of 2023. 


43 of 1950. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


5. (/) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the Commission shall 
determine its own procedure and shall have all the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; 
(b) requiring the production of any document; and 
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office. 


(2) The Commission shall have the power to require any person to furnish any 
information on such points or matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be 
useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the consideration of the Commission. 


(3) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
sections 384 and 385 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


(4) For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits 
of the jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory of India. 


6. (J) The Commission shall cause the amendments made by it in the 
Delimitation Order to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette 
of the State. 


(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such amendment shall have 
the force of law and shall not be called in question in any court. 


(3) As soon as may be after such publication in the Gazette of India, every 
such amendment shall be laid before the House of the People and the Legislative 
Assembly of the State. 


(4) Subject to any law that may govern readjustment and subject to the 
provisions of sub-section (5), the readjustment of seats in the Legislative Assembly 
of the State necessitated by any amendments made by the Commission in the 
Delimitation Order and provided for in that Order as so amended shall apply in 
relation to every election to the Assembly, held after the publication of such 
amendments in the Gazette of India and shall so apply in supersession of the 
provisions relating to representation as provided in the Representation of the 
People Act, 1950. 


(5) Nothing in the foregoing sub-sections shall affect the representation in the 
Legislative Assembly of the State until the dissolution of the Assembly, existing on 
the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the amendments in the Delimitation 
Order made by the Commission. 


7. (1) The Commission may, from time to time, by notification in the Gazette 
of India and in the Official Gazette of the State,— 


(a) correct any printing mistake in the Delimitation Order as amended 
under this Act, or any error occurring therein from any inadvertent slip or 
omission; and 


(6) where the boundaries or the name of any district or any territorial 
division mentioned in the said Order are or is altered, make such amendments 
as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing the Order up-to-date. 


(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is issued, before the House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the 
State. 


Procedure and 
powers of 
Commission. 


Publication of 
amendments and 
their dates of 
operation. 


Certain other 
powers of 
Commission. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part 1—Sec. 1] 


Power to remove 8. (/) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 

canes Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a 
period of two years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


NEW DELHI; 
August 13, 2025 
Shravana 22, 1947 (Saka) 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-110002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-110054. 
KSHITIZ. 2s ne 


KSHITIZ MOHAN. 


MGIPMRND—158GI(S4)—13-08-2025. MOHAN 226180530" 


