रजिस्ट्री de Se Wee -(एन)04/0007/2003- 26 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—26 


The Gazette of Gudia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-07022026-269916 
CG-DL-E-07022026-269916 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग I — खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 2] नई दिल्‍ली, शुक्रवार, फरवरी 6, 2026/माघ 17, 1947 (शक) 
No. 2] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2026/MAGHA 17, 1947 (Saka) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 


Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


RAJYA SABHA 


The following Bills have been introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 6th February, 2026:— 


Bill No. LXXVITI of 2024 


A Bill to amend the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: — 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita ( Amendment) Short title and 
Act, 2024. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Amendment of 
section 103. 


Amendment of 
section 196. 


Amendment of 
section 298. 


Amendment of 
section 299. 


2. 


5. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Provided that the Central Government shall appoint such date 


within three months from the date on which the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita (Amendment) Bill, 2024 receives the assent of the President. 


In the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 103, after sub-section (2), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(3) Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or 
by visible representations or through electronic communication 
or otherwise, incites a person or a group of persons to commit 
murder of any person on the ground of race, caste, community, 
sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar 
ground, shall be punished with death or with imprisonment for 
life and shall also be liable to fine.” 


In the principal Act, in section 196, in sub-section (/), the following 
proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 


“Provided that if any words or actions, referred to in clauses (a) 


to (c) above, of any person causes any person or a group of persons to 
commit murder of any other person on the ground of race, caste, 
community, sex, place of birth, language, personal belief or any other 
similar ground, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment 
for life and shall also be liable to fine.” 


In the principal Act, in section 298, — 


(i) the following provisos shall be inserted, namely:— 


“Provided that if the offence mentioned in sub-section (1) 
is committed by two or more persons with the common intention 
of either insulting the religion of any class of persons or of 
promoting religious animosity between different class of persons 
then each of them shall be punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to seven years and with 
fine: 


Provided further that if a person, either individually or as 
a part of any group of two or more persons, is found guilty of 
offence mentioned in sub-section (/) for a second or subsequent 
time, he shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with 
imprisonment of either description for a term not less than ten 
years and with fine.” 


(ii) the existing section shall be numbered as sub-section (/) and 
after sub-section (/) so numbered, the following new sub-section 
shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(2) Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs or by visible representations or through electronic 
communication or otherwise, incites a person or group of 
persons to commit the offence mentioned under sub- 
section (7) shall be deemed to have committed the said 
offence and shall be liable for the same punishment, 
irrespective of whether he actually participates in the 
commission of such offence or not.” 


In the principal Act, in section 299, the following provisos shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“Provided that if the offence mentioned in this section is 


committed by two or more persons with the common intention of 


45 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


outraging the religious feelings of any class of persons or of promoting 
religious animosity between different class of persons then each of 
them shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a 
term which may extend to seven years and with fine: 


Provided further that if a person, either individually or as a part 
of any group of two or more persons, is found guilty of the offence 
mentioned in this section for a second or subsequent time, he shall be 
punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment of either 
description for a term not less than ten years and with fine.” 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Protection of communal harmony, social tranquility and 
unswerving camaraderie among citizens are a sine qua non not only 
for national integrity but also for the overall development of the 
nation. India, as a nation, and its people, as a society, have so far 
achieved the greatest repute all over the world for its record in 
maintaining communal harmony, social tranquility and unswerving 
camaraderie among citizens, despite having unparalleled cultural and 
religious diversity. However, the differences of faith, language, region 
and even diet persisting among our people sometimes lead to conflicts 
and altercations. Some fringe elements take advantage of such 
untoward incidents for their vested interests and make the situation 
worse. These anti-national forces sometimes succeed in leading people 
to commit heinous crimes, including murder of fellow citizens, on the 
basis of such differences. Unfortunately, there is a rise in the number 
of such crimes motivated by intolerance of differences and hate 
towards ‘others’ being reported from various corners of the country 
recently. Most of the advanced legal systems in the world have 
enacted specific laws to prevent such hate crimes. 


It is high time for India also to have effective law to prevent all 
types of hate crimes and to thwart any attempt to promote enmity 
between different groups of persons. There are provisions in the 
existing criminal law to deal with persons directly involved in 
commission of such offences. But, more often than not, there are 
perpetrators, who hide behind the curtain and abet people to commit 
such crimes and escape prosecution in the absence of law to book 
them. In fact, these facilitators are the real culprits and without 
ensuring proper punishment for them, such crimes cannot be 
eradicated. Further, there are some offenders repeatedly committing 
such hate crimes due to extreme intolerance and radicalization, and 
such offenders should be dealt with severe punishments. 


Section 103 (2) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 
prescribes punishment for each member of a group who have 
committed murder on the ground of race, caste, community, sex, place 
of birth, language, personal belief or any other similar ground. But it 
lacks provision for punishment of persons who actually incites the 
group to commit murder, but not personally involved in commission of 
offence. Similarly, Section 298 prescribes punishment for injuring or 
defiling a place of worship with intent to insult religion of any class. 
Here also there is no provision for punishment of persons who actually 
incites a person or group of persons to commit offence under this 
Section. 


Section 196 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 deals with 
the offence of promoting enmity between different groups on grounds 
of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language etc. and doing 
various acts prejudicial to maintenance of harmony. Sometimes, a 
single incident contemplated under this Act may lead to more heinous 
crimes, such as murder of a person or group of persons or even to a 
large-scale riot. In such cases, the law should provide severe 
punishment for person(s) causing the same. 


The offences mentioned in Sections 298 and 299 of the 
Sanhita become severe in nature and its consequence when it is 
committed by a group of persons with common intention of insulting 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


any religion or of spreading religious animosity among citizens. Hence 
members of the group committing such offences deserve severe 
punishments than an individual committing the same offence. 
Similarly, a person committing any of these offences repeatedly with 
the same intention should also be dealt with severe punishment. 


It is the need of our time to fill up the above-mentioned lacuna 
in the law in order to protect communal harmony and social tranquility 
effectively. Appropriate legal provision should be incorporated into 
the existing Sections for that purpose. 


Hence, this Bill. 
HARIS BEERAN 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. LXXXI of 2024 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2024. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 


Provided that the Central Government shall appoint such date 
within three months from the date on which the Constitution 
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 receives the assent of the President. 


Amendment of 
article 243D. 


Amendment of 
article 243T. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


- In article 243D of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following new 


clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(3A) At least one seat out of the total seats to be filled by direct 
election in every Panchayat shall be reserved for persons with 
disabilities and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Panchayat: 


Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, enhance the 
number of seats to be reserved for persons with disabilities up to a 
maximum of four percentage of the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election in every Panchayat. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, ,,persons with disabilities“ 
shall have the same meaning assigned to ,,person with benchmark 
disability as defined under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 
2016.” 


In article 243T of the Constitution, after clause (3), the following new 
clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(3A) At least one seat out of the total seats to be filled by direct 
election in every Municipality shall be reserved for persons with 
disabilities and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Municipality: 


Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by law, enhance the 
number of seats to be reserved for persons with disabilities up to a 
maximum of four percentage of the total number of seats to be filled by 
direct election in every Municipality. 


Explanation.— For the purpose of this Article clause, ,,persons with 
disabilities“ shall have the same meaning assigned to ,,person with 
benchmark disability“ as defined under the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities Act, 2016.” 


49 of 2016. 


49 of 2016. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Election Commission of India operates under the principle of "No 
Voter Left Behind," striving to ensure comprehensive inclusion in the 
electoral process, which is celebrated as a festival in India. Despite these 
efforts, Divyangs (Persons with Disabilities) remain significantly overlooked 
in public discourse and electoral participation. Although post-colonial India 
has made great strides in enhancing the quality of life for Divyangs, these 
improvements are still insufficient, especially regarding their inclusion in the 
electoral process, particularly so when it comes to the number of Divyangs in 
the Union and State Legislatures and Local Self Government bodies. 
According to the 2011 Census, Divyangs constitute 2.21 per cent. of the 
population, or 2.68 crore individuals. Yet, their participation in the legislative 
bodies and LSGs is not adequately addressed. 


The absence of Divyang representation in the electoral process 
undermines the principles of representation, diversity, and inclusivity crucial 
for a well-functioning democracy. Elected representatives from the Divyang 
community can advocate for accessibility and inclusion, benefiting society as 
a whole. It is essential that Divyangs have a voice and influence in our 
democratic structures commensurate with their presence in society. Currently, 
many decisions affecting their lives are made without proper representation, 
resulting in policies that fail to address their specific needs and experiences. 


As an initial step in the direction of ensuring adequate representation of 
Persons with Disabilities in electoral bodies, it is ideal to provide reservation 
for them in the Local Self Government bodies. The noble concept of ,,equality“ 
enshrined in our Constitution can be achieved only with special consideration 
for the vulnerable classes like Divyangs. The Constitution already provides 
reservation for some other identified vulnerable classes, namely, Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and women, in elected bodies of Local Self 
Governments. Along with these classes, the Divyangs should also be 
considered for providing reservation so as to ensure their representation in 
Panchayat and Municipal bodies. New Clauses are to be incorporated in the 
Articles dealing with reservation of seats in Panchayats and Municipalities in 
Part IX and Part [XA of the Constitution respectively. 


The Bill seeks to achieve this objective. 


HARIS BEERAN 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


lil 


Bill No. II of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Census Act, 1948. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Census (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and 
commencement. 
(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, but not later than 
three months from the date of enactment of this Act, by notification in the 
Gazatte bring this Act into force. 


10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Amendment of 2. In the Census Act, 1948 in section 3, the following provisos shall be 37 of 1948. 
section 3. : 
inserted, namely: — 


“Provided that at least one census in the whole of India shall be taken 
in every ten years. 


Provided further that if the Central Government finds it difficult, for 
any sufficient reason such as war, natural calamity, pandemic etc., to take 
census in the whole or any part of India even after expiry of a period of ten 
years from the last census, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare its intention of taking the census in the whole or any part of India, as 
the case may be, as soon as the exigency for not conducting the census 
ceases to be in existence and thereupon the census shall be taken.” 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Conducting the census in whole of the country on a regular interval is 
a must, as in the absence of a complete census for a long span of time, a 
majority of country’s population will be unable to access several schemes, 
benefits and services. Without a systematically collected population data 
and without having updated information regarding social, political and 
economic status of different sections of the population, implementation of 
developmental projects and social welfare schemes would be 
counterproductive as it may pave way for uneven distribution of resources. 


Periodical census is a legal imperative for the reason that 
constitutionally-mandated policies of social justice, which include 
reservations in electoral constituencies, education and public employments, 
cannot be pursued effectively without correct population data. 


Neither the Constitution nor the Census Act, 1948 as it stands today 
mandates a census to be conducted at a regular interval. However, the 
census on national level has so far been conducted every ten years. Even the 
British Government had conducted census in India periodically every ten 
years without failure since 1881. The first census of Independent India was 
conducted in 1951 and Government of India continued the practice of 
conducting national census every ten years without any delay till 2011. The 
census to be conducted in 2021 was postponed due to pandemic and the 
country still awaits a nationwide data collection. 


Ten year is a reasonable span and the population data with all 
significant information must be updated on the official records in a regular 
interval of every ten year. This is mandatory to secure social, political and 
economic justice; and equality of status and of opportunity to all citizens as 
enshrined in the Preamble of the Constitution. Appropriate amendment in 
the Census Act is required to make this periodical census a legally 
enforceable obligation on the part of Central Government. 


Hence, this Bill. 


HARIS BEERAN. 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


IV 


Bill No. XCI of 2024 


A Bill to define, extend, and protect the rights of individuals 
availing air carrier services and to prevent their exploitation in 
terms of air fares, basic amenities, and unjust profits for air 
service providers and ensure due compensation in case of 
undue delays, loss or damage of luggage etc. 
so as to make air travel more affordable, 
convenient and transparent and for 
matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Airline Passengers’ Rights Act, 2024. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Interline 
agreements 
and 
protections. 


SEC. 2] 


2s 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 


(a) “air carrier” means any airline company registered with the 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (D.G.C.A.) in India and 
includes its Chairman and other members of the Board of Directors 
of the company and Chief Operating Office; 


(b) “airline” means all commercial flights operating in the country 
either on domestic or international routes; 


(c) "compensation" means and includes the payment to be made to 
the passenger for any inconvenience caused to them due to delay or 
cancellation of scheduled flights, loss or damage of luggage or any 
other reason on the part of the airlines while traveling in any 
airlines; 


(d) “foreign airline” means an airline that has been issued an Air 
Operator Certificate by a country other than India to carry out 
specified commercial air transport operations and which operates 
commercial flights in India; 


(e) "frequent flyer" means a passenger who travels by any airlines 
at least twice a month for business or personal purposes; 


(f) "passenger" means any person who travels by any airlines for 
any purpose; and 


(g) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules or regulations made 
under this Act. 


CHAPTER II 
INTERLINE AGREEMENTS AND PROTECTIONS 


Not later than one year from the date of the commencement of this Act, 
the Central Government shall prescribe regulations to facilitate interline 
agreements and related practices between air carriers and providers of 
other modes of transportation and establish a complaint and remediation 
process through which parties may submit complaints and resolve 
disputes regarding the establishment and implementation of interline 
agreements, which shall— 


(i) include provisions to prevent air carriers and other 
transportation providers from significantly hindering or preventing 
willing air carriers or other transportation providers from entering 
into interline agreements or conducting related practices; 


(ii) require air carriers to explicitly notify passengers when they 
are eligible to be provided transportation by another air carrier or a 
provider of another mode of transportation; 


(iii) require air carriers, after an eligible passenger is notified 
under clause (ii), to attempt to provide to the passenger 
transportation through another air carrier or a provider of another 
mode of transportation, upon the passenger’s request, if the air 
carrier has an interline agreement with the other air carrier or 
transportation provider; 


(iv) prohibit air carriers and other transportation providers from 
unduly or improperly influencing the decision of a partner, 
subsidiary, or vendor to enter into an interline agreement, the terms 
or conditions of such an agreement, or related practices; 


14 


4. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(v) account for operational records, seat availability, and capacity; 
(vi) promote competition and public interest; 


(vii) provide for appropriate penalties and remedies for violations 
of an interline agreement; and 


(viii) any other matter related thereto, as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 


PASSENGER PROTECTIONS 


In the event of an airline requiring a passenger to give up their booked 
seat on a flight operated by the air carrier — 


(i) the airline shall offer due monetary compensation to a 
passenger to incentivise them to relinquish their booked seat, in 
such manner as may be prescribed; and 


(ii) the airline shall be prohibited from imposing a cap on the 
amount of compensation to be provided to a passenger in exchange 
for the passenger relinquishing their booked seat. 


(1) In case a passenger’s flight is delayed or cancelled for any reason 
within the control of the airline, including but not limited to crew 
scheduling, routine maintenance, functioning of information technology 
systems, passenger service issues, issues related to baggage services, 
issues related to ground handling of aircraft, or other reasons as may be 
specified by the Central Government, from time to time and - 


(a) the passenger’s arrival at their destination is delayed by more 
than one hour and less than four hours after their originally 
scheduled arrival time, the airline shall — 


(i) automatically refund to the passenger the amount they 
paid for the ticket; and 


(ii) arrange a seat for the passenger on another flight 
operated by the airline, or another airline, or on an alternative 
means of transportation, at no additional expense to the 
passenger, that results in them arriving at their destination not 
later than four hours after the original scheduled arrival time; 


(b) the passenger’s arrival at their destination is delayed by more than 
four hours after their originally scheduled arrival time, the airline 
shall —- 


(i) automatically refund to the passenger the amount they paid 
for the ticket; 


(ii) arrange a seat for the passenger on another flight operated 
by the air carrier, or another airline, or on an alternative means 
of transportation, at no additional expense to the passenger, 
that results in them arriving at their destination not later than 
four hours after the original scheduled arrival time; 


(iii) provide compensation to the passenger of an amount 
equivalent to $1350 in Indian rupees as per the prevalent 
currency exchange rate at that time; and 


(iv) provide passenger with a complimentary meal free of 
charge or an amount equal to the cost of a meal or a free 
coupon to purchase a meal; and 


[PART I— 


Compensation 
to 

passengers for 
relinquishing 
their booked 
seat. 


Compensation 
for delays and 
cancellation. 


SEC. 2] 


Adequate 6. 
seating space 

for 

passengers on 

aircraft. 


Availability 7. 
of lavatories 

on passenger 

aircraft. 


Availability of 8. 
potable water 

on passenger 

aircraft. 


Training on 9. 
rights of 
passengers. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(c) the passenger’s departure is delayed until the next day, the 
airline shall provide the passenger with an amount equal to the 
cost of hotel lodging in addition to the requirements of sub- 
section (2). 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the authority 
of an airline to maximize its system capacity during weather-related 
events to accommodate maximum number of passengers. 


(3) It shall be deemed as an unfair or deceptive practice for an airline or 
foreign airline to attribute the delay or cancellation of a flight operated 
by the airline or by another airline or foreign airline with which the 
airline has a code sharing or other joint marketing arrangement to a force 
majeure event unless the delay or cancellation is caused by an event not 
within the control of the airline operating the flight, such as weather, an 
act of God, or a war or other hostilities and such airline shall be liable to 
penalty, as per the provisions of this Act. 


Every airline shall be required to — 


(i) ensure that seats on their domestic and international aircrafts do 

not violate the minimum dimensions of seats, including the size, 
width, and pitch of seats, and the amount of leg room, and the 
width of aisles, shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government not later than one year from the date of 
commencement of this Act: 


Provided that Central Government shall issue rules or 
regulations in this regard after providing due notice and reasonable 
opportunity for seeking and obtaining comments from all 
stakeholders and holding adequate consultations with the Union 
Ministry of Labour and Employment and the Union Ministry of 
Health and Family Welfare, passenger advocacy organisations, and 
ergonomic engineers. 


(ii) prominently display on a publicly available internet website of 

the airline, the amount of space available for each passenger on a 
passenger aircraft operated by the airline or by another airline with 
which the airline has a code sharing or other joint marketing 
arrangement, including the size, width, and pitch of seats, the 
amount of leg room, and the width of aisles on such aircraft. 


Each airline and foreign airline shall ensure that each passenger 
aircraft operated by them maintains sufficient functional lavatories 
that — 


(i) are available for use, free of charge, at any time passengers 
are on board the aircraft, except during takeoff, landing, 
turbulent weather conditions or any other situation likely to 
jeopardize passenger safety and as duly informed to them by the 
aircraft crew; and 


(ii) can accommodate and is user friendly for persons with 
disabilities. 


Each airline and foreign airline shall ensure that potable water is 
areal, free of charge, to passengers on board the aircraft operated by 
them. 


Every air carrier shall provide, at a frequency of not less than every 180 

days, training on the rights of passengers to employees and 
representatives of the air carrier who directly interact with passengers, 
including ticket agents, gate agents, pilots, and flight attendants etc.. 


16 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


10. Not later than one hundred and eighty days from the date of 
commencement of this Act, and thereafter at such intervals as may be 
prescribed, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall submit to the 
appropriate Committees of Parliament, as may be prescribed, a report, in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed, assessing — 


(i) the quality and safety of food and potable water provided to 
passengers on passenger aircraft; 


(ii) whether air carriers ensure that sufficient flight crews and 
aircraft are available for scheduled flights; 


(iii) the extent to which not having sufficient flight crews 
and aircraft available affects scheduled arrival and departure times; 
and 


(iv) भगाए other matter, as may be prescribed or as directed by 
the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, from time to time. 


CHAPTERIV 
CONSUMER PROTECTIONS 


11. (1) Every airline shall be prohibited from imposing fees that are 
unreasonable or disproportional to the costs incurred by the airline 
including — 


(a) any fee for a change or cancellation of a reservation for a flight 
in air transportation; 


(b) any fee relating to checked baggage or carry-on baggage to be 
transported on a flight; 


(c) any fee relating to seat selection or reservations on a flight; 


(d) any fee relating to changing between flights departing on the 
same day or flying standby on a flight; and 


(e) any other fee imposed by an air carrier relating to a flight; 


(2) The Central Government shall, not later than one hundred and eighty 
days from the date of commencement of this Act, establish standards for 
assessing whether such fees, as referred to in sub-section (/) are 
reasonable and proportional to the costs incurred by the airline by taking 
into consideration the following, namely — 


(a) with respect to a fee described in clause (a) of sub-section (४) 
imposed by an airlines for a change or cancellation of a flight 
reservation — 


(i) any net benefit or cost to the airline from the change or 
cancellation, taking into consideration— 


I. the ability of the airline to anticipate the expected 
average number of cancellations and changes and make 
reservations accordingly; 


I. the ability of the airline to fill a seat made available by a 
change or cancellation; 


III. any difference in the fare likely to be paid for a ticket 
sold to another passenger for a seat made available by the 
change or cancellation, as compared to the fare paid by the 
passenger who changed or cancelled the passenger’s 
reservation; and 


Reporting to 
the 
Parliament 


Protections 
relating to the 
imposition of 
fees that are 
not 
reasonable 
and 
proportional 
to the costs 
incurred. 


SEC. 2] 


Protections 12. 
relating to 

disclosure of 

flight 

information. 


Transparency 13. 
in pricing of 

tickets in air 

transportation 


Frequent flyer 14. 
programs, 

fairness and 

transparency 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


JV. the likelihood that the passenger changing or cancelling 
the passenger’s reservation will fill a seat on another flight 
by the same airline; 


(ii) the costs of processing the change or cancellation 
electronically; and 


(iii) any related labour costs; 


(b) with respect to a fee described in clause (b) of sub-section (/) 
imposed by an air carrier relating to checked baggage — 


(i) the costs of processing checked baggage electronically; and 
(ii) any related labour costs; and 


(c) any other considerations that the Central Government may 
consider appropriate. 


(3) Not later than two hundred and seventy days from the date of 
commencement of this Act, and thereafter at such intervals as may be 
prescribed, the Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall lay a report 
for assessing whether the fees imposed by airlines are reasonable and 
proportional to their costs based on the standards specified in sub-section 
(2), in such form and manner as may be prescribed, before each House of 
Parliament. 


Every airline shall be prohibited from limiting or withholding 
information relating to schedules, fares, including the lowest available 
fare options, fees, availability, and taxes relating to flights in passenger 
air transportation from consumers and online travel agents and 
metasearch engines that provide flight search tools. 


(1) Every airline shall provide useable, current, and accurate information 
in a user-friendly, accessible form, with respect to fares, applicable 
taxes, and ancillary fees to ticket agents, online travel agents, and 
metasearch engines that provide flight search tools. 


(2) Every airline shall allow consumers to purchase tickets and pay for 
applicable taxes and ancillary fees through ticket agents, online travel 
agents, and metasearch engines that provide flight search tools; 


(3) Every Airline, ticket agents online travel agents and metasearch 
engines that provide flight search tools shall disclose all applicable taxes 
and any ancillary fees charged by an airline with respect to a fare that is 
applicable to the services identified by the purchaser, at any point at 
which the fare is shown in whole or in part; and 


(4) Every Airline, ticket agents online travel agents and metasearch 
engines that provide flight search tools, through 3 telephonic 
communication with a prospective consumer regarding the cost of air 
transportation, shall inform the consumer of all applicable taxes and any 
ancillary fees charged by an airline in relation to the air transportation 
and associated services requested by the consumer, at any point at which 
the cost of the air transportation is disclosed in whole or in part. 


Not later than one hundred and eighty days from the date of 
commencement of this Act, the Central Government shall prescribe rules 
and/or regulations to prevent unfair changes to frequent flyer programs 
depriving its members of its benefits by — 


(i) considering the significance of the change to the frequent flyer 
program’s terms and conditions; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(ii) considering the amount of time between the notification 
provided to a consumer and the date on which the change takes 
effect; and 


(iii) requiring each airline that offers a frequent flyer program to 
disclose, in a standardised format, when offering or enrolling 
consumers into the program, accurate information regarding the 
program’s rules, including— 


(a) the rate at which credits are earned; 

(b) the minimum number of credits earned per flight; 
(c) the number of credits needed for each award; 

(d) any applicable deadlines for redeeming credits; 


(e) any restrictions on the transferability of earned credit and 
awards; 


(f) other conditions and limitations of the program; 
(g) the percentage of successful redemptions; and 


(h) frequent flyer seats made available in the top origin and 
destination markets. 


15. In case a passenger’s baggage is lost, damaged, delayed, or stolen, the Refunds for 
airline shall - 109, damaged. 
delayed, or 
stolen 
(i) promptly provide an automatic refund to a passenger in the baggage. 
amount of any ancillary fee charged by the airline for checked 
baggage if the passenger’s checked baggage arrives damaged; and 
(ii) provide notification to a passenger who is impacted by lost, 
damaged, delayed, or stolen baggage, through the passenger’s 
chosen method of communication, of the procedure by which the 
passenger shall obtain a refund and the amount of the refund. 
16. All airlines shall notify passengers of their rights and eligibility for Passenger 
refunds, compensation, and protections required by law, including by an Baus 


airline’s contract of carriage, or otherwise available to passenger, which 
shall include the following, namely— 


(i) promptly and expressly notify eligible passengers and the 
public of their eligibility for refunds, compensation, and 
protections not later than 30 minutes after the airline becomes 
aware that such passengers have become eligible for such refunds, 
compensation, and protections; 


(ii) if such airlines permit passengers and other interested persons 
to subscribe to flight status notification services— 


(a) to deliver refunds, compensation, and _ protection 
notifications to subscribers to such services, by whatever 
means the airline offers and which the subscriber chooses; and 


(b) to incorporate commitments with respect to such services 
into their customer service plans; 


(iii) to continuously display information and _ eligibility 
requirements for refunds, compensation, and protections, including 
refunds, compensation, and protections relating to — 


Powers to 
make rules 


SEC. 2] 


17. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(a) denied boarding and delays and cancellations (including on 
international flights); and 


(b) lost, damaged, or delayed luggage; and 


(iv) to prominently display passengers’ rights and complaint 
submission system and the guidelines for escalation on boarding 
passes, computer-generated boarding passes, and ticketed itineraries, at 
boarding gates and ticket counters and other prominent places at airports. 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a 
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule. 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India, over the last few years, has seen a rapid increase in air traffic, 
first-time flyers, as well as airports and attained the status of being the third 
largest aviation market globally. As India progresses towards its goal of 
being a developed country, fast and affordable travel becomes a necessity 
for all its citizens. 


While India allows a free-market system to decide air fares without the 
Government’s intervention, airline companies often charge exorbitantly high 
prices for their services making air travel unaffordable for a large section of 
our population. 


Moreover, India’s airline industry broadly consists of a few giant players 
forming an oligopoly market, often leaving the quality of their services 
unchecked and sub-par. 


A passenger-centric approach is required by addressing passengers’ health 
concerns, by ensuring a minimum seat and aisle size inside aircrafts, and 
access to in-flight lavatories and potable water; their travel-related concerns 
with adequate compensation for any delays or losses, and possibilities for 
interline connectivity; increasing transparency and accountability and 
strengthening redressal mechanisms by making passengers aware of their 
rights. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 


PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 21 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purpose of this Bill. As the rules relate to the matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


22 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. V of 2025 


A Bill to promote wellbeing of full-time, temporary, and contractual employees 
in their workplace by limiting working hours, fixing leaves, 
addressing mental health concerns, and ensuring 
appropriate compensation and for matters 
connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Employees’ Wellbeing Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Working hours. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 23 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


3. 


(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) ‘employee’ means any person contributing towards activities at 
an organisation whether by rendering their services or contributing 
knowledge and includes full-time, part-time, contractual, temporary, 
seasonal workers, interns or any other form of work arrangement; 


(c) ‘employer’ means any person or entity employing or engaging one 
or more employees for any activity or service in an organisation, and 
includes their representatives, or assigns; 


(d) ‘night work’ means the duty to be performed by an employee for at 
least three hours of their working time during the period between twenty 
hours of a given day to six hours of the next day; 


(e) ‘night worker’ means any worker who performs night work; 


() ‘organisation’ means any private entity established or located or 
registered in the country for the purpose of carrying out business, trade, 
profession, or other economic activities in the organised or unorganised 
sector; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central 
Government under this Act; 


(h) ‘recently graduated’ means any person who has completed an 
educational degree or diploma from a recognised university or school 
within the last three years and is working in a professional environment 
for the first time; 


(i) ‘rest period’ means any period which is not designated as 
working time; 


(@) ‘shift work’ means any method of organising work in shifts 
whereby workers succeed each other at the same work stations according 
to a certain pattern, including a rotating pattern, and which may involve 
continuous or discontinuous operations, entailing the need for workers to 
work at different times over a given period of days or weeks; 


(k) ‘shift worker’ means any worker whose work schedule is part of 
shift work; 


(I) ‘week’ means a consecutive period of seven days; and 


(m) ‘working time’ means any period during which the employee 
working is at the employer's disposal and is carrying out his activity or 
duties as required by the employer, in accordance with national laws 
and/or practice. 


CHAPTER II 
WORKING HOURS, REST PERIODS, AND LEAVES 


(1) No organisation or employer shall require or permit an employee to work 
for more than forty-two hours in any week. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this sub-section, the total working 
hours in any week shall be calculated as an average of weekly working hours 
over a continuous period of four weeks. 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), an employer may 
require an employee to work up to forty-eight hours in a week, subject to the 
condition that such extended hours shall not be required for more than two 
days in a calendar month. 


(3) In case an employee is required to work beyond the prescribed limit of 
working hours under sub-section (/), such employee shall be entitled to 
overtime wages as specified in sub-section (3) of section 9. 


(4) In case of an emergency in an organisation, employer may request an 
employee to perform work beyond the prescribed working hours, subject 
to the employee’s consent and such employee shall accordingly be paid 
in overtime wages. 


(5) An employee shall have the right to refuse his agreement to work 
overtime, as may be required by the employer under sub-section (4) or 
revoke it at any moment. 


(6) If the working hours of an employee on any day exceeds six hours, then 
such employee shall be entitled to a rest break as may be prescribed. 


(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, every employer 
shall ensure that an employee gets the minimum hours of rest which shall 
not be less than: 


(a) ten consecutive hours of rest in any period of twenty-four hours; 
and 


(b) a total of seventy-seven hours of rest in any period of seven days. 


(6) The provisions of this section shall apply to all forms of employment, 
whether in-person, remote, or hybrid forms of working. 


(1) Where an organisation or employer requires an employee to perform 
night work, the organization or the employer shall ensure that normal 
hours of work for night workers do not exceed an average of eight hours 
in any twenty-four-hour period. 


(2) For employees engaged in night work involving special hazards or 
heavy physical or mental strain, the working hours shall not exceed such 
number of hours in any period of twenty-four hours during which such 
night work is performed, as may be prescribed. 


Explanation.— The determination of work involving special hazards 
or heavy physical or mental strain for the purposes of sub-section (2) shall 
be made in accordance with rules prescribed under this Act. 


(3) An employee undertaking night work suffering from health problems 
recognised as being attributable to such work shall, upon recommendation 
by a medical practitioner, be transferred whenever possible to day work to 
which he is suited. 


(1) An organisation or employer shall provide at least forty-five days of 
leave every year to its employees, whether permanent or temporary: 


Provided that out of the total number of leaves provided by an 
organisation or employer, at least thirty days of leaves shall be paid 
leaves, which shall include medical and menstrual leave also. 


(2) If a gazetted holiday falls on the day which is already considered a 
leave by the organisation or employers, such as a weekly off day, the 
organisation or employer shall provide an additional day of leave to its 
employees, which shall not be included within the leave entitlement under 
sub-section (/). 


Night work. 


Leaves. 


Right to 
disconnect. 


Mental 
wellbeing 
check-up 
services 

by mental 
health 
professionals 
for 

employees. 


Guidelines to 
create a healthy 
workplace. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 25 


(3) An organisation or employer shall determine the distribution of leaves 
permitted throughout the calendar year for the employees: 


Provided that the distribution of leave so determined in this sub- 
section shall comply with the provisions of this Act. 


(1) Every employee shall have the right to disconnect from work-related 
communications in any form, from the organisation or the employer, outside 
their official working hours. 


(2) No adverse consequence or disciplinary action shall be imposed upon any 
employee for exercising his right under sub-section (7). 


(3) The guidelines for the effective implementation of this section, including 
measures to address grievances arising from its violation, shall be such as 
may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 
PROVISIONS FOR MENTAL HEALTH 


(1) Every organisation shall provide for voluntary mental wellbeing 
check-up services for all employees with professional mental health 
experts on such interval as may be prescribed, to ensure a healthy work- 
life balance for all employees. 


(2) Every organisation shall provide mandatory monthly mental 
wellbeing check-up services for all recently graduated employees with 
professional mental health experts to ensure a healthy work-life balance 
for new employees. 


(3) The mental wellbeing check-up services under sub-section (J) and 
(2) shall be provided by qualified health professionals who may be either 
employed in-house or engaged externally through contractual 
arrangements. 


(4) The reports from the mental wellbeing check-up sessions shall 
remain confidential with the mental health professionals conducting such 
sessions. 


(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (4), the mental health 
professionals may give their general review of employees’ mental health 
to the organisation’s administrators, to ensure mental wellbeing of all 
employees, while maintaining confidentiality of the matter. 


(1) The appropriate Government shall issue guidelines, on such intervals as 
may be prescribed to create a healthy workplace, and may include measures 
for addressing workplace challenges, promoting transparency, fostering 
ethical practices, and ensuring the physical and mental well-being of 
employees, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every organisation or employer shall clearly specify guidelines to its 
employees on growth and promotion opportunities in the workplace to 
prevent overworking, unfair exclusion of employees, and unfair power 
dynamics in the workplace. 


(3) The head of every organisation or employer shall convene meetings at 
regular intervals with union representatives or other authorised 
representatives of employees to review and address feedback related to 
workplace conditions and implement measures for fostering a healthy and 
inclusive workplace environment. 


29 of 2019. 


26 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


CHAPTERIV 


WAGES 


9. (1) The appropriate Government shall specify the minimum wages for 


10. 


different categories of employees, including stipends for recently-graduated 
employees, in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the minimum wages specified in this sub-section shall be 
in consonance with the Code on Wages, 2019 unless otherwise provided in 
this Act. 


(2) The minimum wage or stipend for an employee prescribed under sub- 
section (J) shall be determined in proportion to the cost of living in the 
geographical location from where the employee is expected to perform his 
duties. 


(3) An employee shall be entitled to overtime wages calculated at twice the 
hourly rate of his usual remuneration for performing any overtime work 
beyond forty-two hours in a week. 


(4) All wages, stipends, and overtime payments payable to an employee under 
this Act shall be adjusted to the prevailing rate of inflation on a yearly basis 
in such manner as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 


(1) (a) Every organisation employing such minimum number of employees, 
as may be prescribed, shall, within one year of the commencement of this 
Act, constitute a Grievance Redressal Committee of the Organisation to 
address any concerns of the employees relating to the provisions of this Act; 
and 


(b) The Grievance Redressal Committee of an organisation shall consist of 
not less than three and not more than ten members, including— 


(i) at least one member who is a qualified legal professional; and 


(ii) at least one external member from the senior management of another 
organisation in the same sector: 


Provided that the members of the Grievance Redressal Committee 
shall be periodically replaced in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2)(a) Every State Government shall, within one year of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a State Grievance Redressal Committee in each State, which 
shall address complaints escalated to them from the Grievance Redressal 
Committee of the Organisation constituted under sub-section (1): 


Provided that in case of the absence of a Grievance Redressal 
Committee in the organisation as required under sub-section (/), an employee 
may submit his complaint directly to the State Grievance Redressal 
Committee concerned. 


(b) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Grievance Redressal 
Committee of the organisation, may prefer an appeal against such order to the 
State Grievance Redressal Committee on the grounds of facts or law within 
such period from the date of the order and in such form and manner, as may 
be prescribed. 


Wages. 


Grievance 
redressal 
committees. 


Grants by the 
Central 
Government. 


SEC. 2] 


11. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27 


(c) The State Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of not more 
than ten members, including— 


(i) at least two legal professionals; 
(ii) at least three representatives of labour unions; 
(iii) experienced professionals from diverse industries; and 


(iv) at least one expert in labour rights, such as an activist, 
lawyer, or researcher. 


(3)(a) The Central Government shall, within one year of the 
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a Central Grievance Redressal Committee to address 
complaints escalated from the State Grievance Redressal Committees or 
address matters connected thereon or incidental therewith, either 
referred to it or taken up on suo-moto basis; and 


(b) The Central Grievance Redressal Committee shall consist of ten 
members, including— 


(i) at least two legal professionals; 
(ii) at least three representatives of national-level labour unions; 


(iii) professionals with expertise in industries of national 
relevance; and 


(iv) at least one academician or researcher in the field of labour 
rights and employment. 


(4) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules to provide 
for the qualifications, method of recruitment, procedure for appointment, 
salaries, term of office, resignation and removal of the members of the Central 
and State Grievance Redressal Committees. 


(5) The appropriate Government shall provide the Central and State 
Grievance Redressal Committees with such officers and other employees 
as may be required to assist them in the discharge of their functions. 


(6) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the officers and other employees referred in sub- 
section (5) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(7) The functions of the Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees, 
the mechanism for filing complaint and manner in which the complaint shall 
be filed and admitted, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament, by law in this behalf, provide funds to the Central and State 
Grievance Redressal Committees by way of grants, as it may consider 
necessary, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees may utilize 
such grants as they deem fit for performing the functions and 
discharging the duties assigned to them under this Act, and such 
expenditures shall be treated as payable out of the funds referred to in 
sub-section (1). 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(3) The accounts of the funds received and expenditures incurred by the 
Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall be maintained 
and audited in the manner prescribed by the appropriate Government. 


12. The Central and the State Grievance Redressal Committee shall prepare, in Annual report. 
such form and at such time, for each financial year, as may be prescribed, its 
annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the appropriate Government. 


13. The appropriate Government shall cause the annual report together with the हक report 
audit report, to be laid, as soon as may be after the reports are received, before on nica 
each House of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be. Parliament or the 

State 
Legislature. 

14. (J) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall, while Powers of the 
State and 


inquiring into any matter under this Act, have the same powers as are 
५ eile 3 a A C Cina Central 
vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil तहत 
Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following matters, namely: Redressal 
Committees. 


5 of 1908. 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
compel them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to produce 
the documents or things; 


(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 


(४) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any 
court or office; 


(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or 
documents; and 


(f) | any other matter which may be prescribed. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees 
may, during the inquiry into any complaint under this Act, examine any 
record to which this Act applies which is under the control of the 
Committee, and no such record may be withheld from it on any grounds. 


(3) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall inquire 
into any matter in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees shall maintain 
a register of complaints containing such particulars and such record of 
proceedings as may be specified by regulations. 


15. (1) The Central and State Grievance Redressal Committees may, on the basis Violation and 
of an inquiry made in accordance with the procedure laid down by or under poate: 
this Act, — 


(a) impose amonetary penalty for violation of the provisions of this 
Act and rules made thereunder, which may extend up to ten lakh rupees; 
and 


(b) recommend the initiation of criminal prosecution in cases 
involving severe violations of the provisions of this Act and rules made 
thereunder, as per the applicable laws. 


(2) The manner of recovery of the monetary penalty imposed under sub- 
section (/)(a) and the timeframe for disposal of an inquiry initiated under sub- 
section (/) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Power to make 
rules. 


SEC. 2] 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 29 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


30 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


As India progresses on its path to development, numerous international and 
domestic organizations have established offices in the country, creating 
employment opportunities for Indians. However, due to lenient labour laws, 
employees in these organizations often work long hours and are expected to be 
available at unreasonable times of the day. 


2. India’s workforce comprises a wide range of employment types, including 
formal, informal, part-time, and gig work. This diversity underscores the need 
for comprehensive labour laws that apply to all categories of workers to prevent 
exploitation and promote a healthy work-life balance. 


3. Many employees experience overwork, toxic work cultures, inadequate 
work-life balance, and limited attention to mental health concerns. These issues 
frequently lead to burnout and diminish economic productivity. 


4. To address these modern forms of "corporate slavery" and the growing 
dissatisfaction among the workforce, government intervention is essential. Such 
measures would ensure that employees are not overworked, maintain a healthy 
work-life balance, and receive necessary support for their mental health. 


5. This Bill, therefore, seeks to promote healthier workplace practices and 
establish a structured grievance redressal mechanism to safeguard employees' 
rights and well- being. 


Hence, this Bill. 


PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 31 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall 
constitute a Grievance Redressal Committee at the State and the Central Level. 
Clause 11 provides for the grants by the Central Government to the Central and 
State Grievance Redressal Committees. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


32 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purpose of this Bill. As the rules relate to the matters of details only 
the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 33 


VI 


Bill No. IV of 2025 


A Bill to provide for regulation of animal breeders and owners and to 
prohibit the inbreeding and cross-breeding of non-indigenous domestic 
and pet animals in the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Regulation of Animal Breeding Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 


by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


34 


2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “animal” means a domestic animal which may be kept for any 
purpose, including but not limited to livestock, research, or as a 
pet animal; 


(b) “animal breeder” means anyone who is legally authorised to 
breed animals, whether through Government licensing or 
authorisations provided by the Animal Welfare Board of India or 
the State Animal Welfare Board; 


(c) “animal owner” shall have the same meaning as assigned to 
“owner” in the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960; 


(४) “Animal Welfare Board of India” means the statutory 
advisory body established under section 4 of the Prevention of 
Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, functioning under the aegis of the 
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying and 
promotes animal welfare in the country; 


(e) “commercial animal breeding” (or “commercial breeding”) 
means the business of breeding animals for the purpose of selling 
them and does not include using them as livestock or pack 
animals; 


(f) “Committee for Control and Supervision of Experiments on 
Animals” means the statutory body established under section 15 
of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, for 
controlling and supervising experiments on animals; 


(g) “cross-breeding” means the deliberate mating of two animals 
that are different breeds or varieties of the same species; 


(h) “domestic animal” means any species of animal that has been 
tamed, whether socially or genetically, and can co-exist in society 
without being a threat; 


(i) “inbreeding” means the deliberate mating of animals that 
share a recent common ancestor and for the purposes of this Act, 
two animals are considered to have recent common ancestors if 
they share a common ancestor within the last three generations 
before the older animal; 


Illustration For instance, any animal whose parent, 
grandparent, or great-grandparent is the same as the parent, 
grandparent or great-grandparent of another animal shall be 
considered to have recent common ancestors; 


(j) “indigenous breed” means any animal breed which is native to 
the soil and climatic conditions of India, and shall include local 
indigenous breeds emerging from specific regions of the country; 


(k) “livestock” means any animal which is kept as an asset 
and can provide labour or produce commodities for consumption; 


(9 “non-indigenous breed” means any animal breed which is not 
an indigenous breed; 


(m) “pet animal” means any domestic animal that is kept by a 
person in their household for private enjoyment and 
companionship; and 


(n) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


59 of 1960. 


59 of 1960. 


59 of 1960. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CHAPTER II 


REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF ANIMAL BREEDERS AND ANIMAL 
OWNERS 


(1) No person shall be permitted to pursue commercial animal breeding 
unless they are registered with the Animal Welfare Board of India. 


(2) The Animal Welfare Board of India shall, either through sub-units in 
States, or by itself: 


() maintain a register of animal breeders in the country in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed and shall include 
information on the species, breeds, and number of animals bred 
by them; and 


(ii) make criteria for the inclusion of animal breeders in the register. 


(3) While registering and licensing an animal breeder, the Animal Welfare 
Board of India shall ensure that minimum requirements for animal 
breeding are met as specified through guidelines under section 6 of this 
Act. 


(4) The State Government may formulate additional regulations to issue 
licenses for animal breeders. 


(5) The registration of animal breeders as done by the Animal Welfare 
Board of India shall be valid for not more than a period of six years, 
beginning from the date of issuance of the certificate of registration, and 
the registration may be renewed before the expiry of the previous 
registration certificate for a person to continue as an animal breeder. 


(6) The Animal Welfare Board of India may formulate regulations on the 
procedure for registration of animal breeders including the fees, renewal of 
registration certificate after adequate quality checks, and the timeline of 
registration, which should not exceed ninety days, starting from the date of 
submission of the application to register to the issuance of the registration 
certificate or proof of rejection of the application. 


(7) The provisions of this section are applicable to all animal breeders, 
including those that are currently practicing animal breeding. 


(1) All animal owners, owning animals for any purpose, including as 
pets, livestock, or for research purposes, except for commercial 
breeding, shall be required to register their animals with the Animal 
Welfare Board of India. 


(2) The Animal Welfare Board of India shall, either through sub-units 
in States, or by itself: 


(6) maintain a register of animals owned in the country in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed and shall 
include information on the species, breeds, and details of the 
owner; and 


(ii) have the right to refuse registration, and hence ownership of 
animals to any person that do not seem well-equipped to care for 
the animal, as per the criteria as may be prescribed. 


(3) While registering an animal and its owner, the Animal Welfare 
Board of India shall ensure that minimum requirements for animal 
ownership are met as specified through guidelines under section 7 of 
this Act. 


35 


Registration and 


licensing 
animal breeders. 


Registration 
animal owners. 


of 


of 


Formation 


of 


animal-specific 


regulatory 
bodies. 


Guidelines 
breeding 
breeders. 


for 
and 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(4) In the event of the birth of offspring(s) of an already registered 
animal, it is the responsibility of the owner of the parent animal to 
register the offspring(s) and accordingly obtain a new litter certificate 
for the same, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(5) The State Government may formulate additional regulations to 
register animals and their owners. 


(6) The registration of animals as done by the Animal Welfare Board 
of India shall be valid throughout the lifetime of an animal and may 
be renewed in the case of change of ownership. 


(7) The Animal Welfare Board of India may formulate regulations on the 
procedure for registration of animals and their owners. 


(6) The provisions of this section are applicable to all owned animals, 
including those that are currently animal owned for personal or 
professional uses. 


CHAPTER III 
REGULATORY BODIES 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
facilitate the formation of separate regulatory bodies for each species of 
animal under the Animal Welfare Board of India. 


(2) The animal-specific regulatory bodies shall be responsible for: 
(i) ensuring safe and ethical breeding of each animal variety; 


(ii) ensuring availability of adoption shelters and foster homes with 
adequate provisions for animals without owners; 


(iii) encouraging research towards healthy breeding practices and for 
improvements to the breed quality of indigenous animals; 


(iv) ensuring compliance of the extant provisions of animal breeding 
and animal ownership; 


(v) regulating the animal breeding and ownership industry to prevent 
cruelty and abandonment of animals; 


(vi) promoting adoption of indigenous animal breeds for all 
purposes, particularly as pets; and 


(vii) formulating guidelines pertinent to sections 6 and 7 of this Act. 
CHAPTER IV 
GUIDELINES FOR BREEDING, PET OWNERSHIP, AND IMPORT 


The Central Government shall issue guidelines, not later than one 
hundred and eighty days from the date of commencement of this Act, 
on breeding of animals which shall include provisions regarding, but 
not limited to: 


(i) the minimum age at which an animal may be used for breeding, 
specified based on the species and its average life span; 


(ii) the maximum age at which an animal may be used for breeding, 
specified based on the species and its average life span; 


(iii) the frequency at which a singular animal may be used for 
breeding to prevent any health deterioration of the parent and 
offspring animals; 


SEC. 2] 


7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(iv) the minimum and maximum age by which an animal shall be 
vaccinated; 


(v) authorising only qualified persons, either by training or by 
experience, to take up commercial breeding; 


(vi) ensuring that any commercial breeding facility is well equipped 
for breeding animals and follows ethical practices of breeding; 


(vii) ensuring that no animals are harmed or deprived in a breeding 
facility; 


(viii) ensuring that offsprings of animals are registered through new 
litter certificates; 


(ix) encouraging research to improve breeds of indigenous animals 
and setting breed standards through scientifically monitored 
processes; and 


(x) encouraging efforts towards popularising indigenous animal 
breeds through collaboration with animal lovers and regulatory 
bodies; and 


(xi) any genetic deficiency identified during cross-breeding animals for 
research purposes shall be reported to the Animal Welfare Board of 
India within sixty days of identifying the deficiency. 


The Central Government shall issue guidelines, not later than one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of commencement of this Act, on pet 
ownership which shall include provisions regarding, but not limited to: 


(i) ensuring that a pet owner does not cause their pet animal any 
unnecessary pain, suffering or distress, throughout its lifetime, 
including at times when the pet animal’s life may have to be terminated 
to free it of suffering; 


(ii) ensuring health and welfare of the pet animals, including 
vaccinations and microchipping; 


(iii) ensuring the provision of food, water, exercise, and space for a pet 
animal based on the typical traits of its species and breed; 


(iv) limiting pet ownership to persons above the age of eighteen; 


(v) preventing pet ownership to persons who may not be well-equipped 
to care for an animal; and 


(vi) preventing pet ownership of animals that are unsuitable to be kept 
as pets. 


The Government shall issue guidelines, not later than one hundred and 
eighty days from the date of commencement of this Act, on import of 
animals for breeding purposes which shall include provisions regarding, 
but not limited to: 


(i) ensuring that every animal that enters the country has a health 
certification issued by the country of origin to prove the animal’s good 
health and status of vaccination; 


(ii) ensuring that every animal that is imported into the country is 
suitable to survive in the climate of its destination and that adequate 
resources are available for its wellbeing; 


(iii) ensuring that every animal that enters the country reaches its 
destination, is not allowed to escape, and its excreta is not littered; 


37 


Guidelines for pet 
ownership. 


Guidelines for 
import of animals. 


38 


Banning _cross- 9, 
breeding and 

inbreeding of non- 

indigenous animal 

breeds for non- 

research and non- 

livestock 

purposes. 


Partial ban on 10. 
cross-breeding 

and complete ban 

on inbreeding of 
non-indigenous 

animal breeds for 

livestock 

purposes. 


Sterilising animal 11. 
breeds with genetic 

deficiencies due to 
cross-breeding and 

inbreeding with 

non-indigenous 

animals. 


Grievance 12. 
redressal with the 

Animal Welfare 

Board of India. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(iv) cleaning and disinfecting of animal that is imported into the 
country immediately upon reaching its destination; 


(v) facilitating random checks of animals being imported to ensure 
their health conditions and adequate safety measures being undertaken 
while transporting them; 


(vi) ensuring that the imported animals comply with guidelines 
specified for breeding and pet ownership, as specified in Sections 6 
and 7 of this Act; and 


(vii) ensuring that any animal for non-breeding purposes is sterilised 
before it enters the country. 


CHAPTER IV 
BREEDING RESTRICTIONS FOR PETS AND LIVESTOCK 


(1) No animal breeder shall be permitted to cross-breed a non- 
indigenous animal breed with an indigenous animal breed of the same 
species for any non-research and non-livestock purposes, including for 
keeping it as a pet or pack animal. 


(2) No animal breeder shall be permitted to cross-breed two different 
non-indigenous animal breeds of the same species for any non-research 
and non-livestock purposes, including for keeping it as a pet or pack 
animal. 


(3) No animal breeder shall be permitted to inbreed a non-indigenous 
animal breed for any non-research and non-livestock purposes, 
including for keeping it as a pet or pack animal. 


(4) Any animal breeder cross-breeding or inbreeding a non-indigenous 
animal breed for research purposes shall strictly comply with the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960, its rules and guidelines. 


(5) The Committee for Control and Supervision of Experiments on 
Animals shall formulate rules to prevent any cross-breeding or 
inbreeding of a non-indigenous animal breed for research purposes, 
which is known to cause genetic deficiencies in the offspring, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(1) An animal breeder may cross-breed a non-indigenous and indigenous 
animal breed or two non-indigenous breeds for livestock purposes if it has 
been scientifically tested to be advantageous for the offspring in terms of 
its health and product yield, and poses no threat of genetic deficiencies. 


(2) No animal breeder shall be permitted to inbreed a non-indigenous 
animal breed for livestock purposes. 


An animal offspring already produced for any purpose, before the 
implementation of this Act, through cross-breeding or inbreeding of a non- 
indigenous animal breed with known genetic deficiencies, shall be 
sterilised by the owner or the breeder, in the absence of an owner, to 
prevent reproduction and amplification of genetic deficiencies. 


CHAPTER V 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 


(1) Any person aggrieved with the violation of any provisions of this Act 
may approach the Animal Welfare Board of India or the State Animal 
Welfare Board, if available. 


(2) The Animal Welfare Board of India shall constitute a Grievance 
Appellate Committee with at least five members, as may be prescribed, to 


[PART I— 


59 of 1960 


5 of 1908. 


SEC. 2] 


13. 


14. 


15. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


address any grievances it receives with respect to the provisions of this Act 
and their enactment. 


(1) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall, while inquiring into any 
matter under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court 
while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of 
the following matters, namely: 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and 
compelling them to give oral or written evidence on oath and to 
produce the documents or things; 


(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court 
or office; 


(e) issuing summons for examination of witnesses or documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything inconsistent in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Grievance Appellate Committee may, during the 
inquiry into any complaint under this Act, examine any record to which 
this Act applies which is under the control of the Committee, and no such 
record may be withheld from it on any grounds. 


(3) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall inquire into any matter in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Grievance Appellate Committee shall maintain a register of 
complaints containing such particulars and such record of proceedings as 
may be prescribed. 


The Grievance Appellate Committee may, on the basis of an inquiry made 
in accordance with the procedure laid down by or under this Act: 


(a) impose a fine of up to ten lakh rupees for violation of code of 
ethics and conduct by animal breeders, owners, regulators, or elected 
administrators of regulated bodies; and 


(b) initiate criminal prosecution in cases of severe violation of code 
of ethics and conduct, or unethical or unprofessional conduct, 
against animal breeders, owners, regulators, or elected 
administrators of regulatory bodies. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


39 


Powers of 
Grievance 
Appellate 
Committee. 


the 


Violations and 


penalties. 


Powers of Central 


Government 
make rules 
laying thereof. 


to 
and 


Power of State 
Government to 
make regulations 
and laying 
thereof. 


40 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act and not inconsistent with the rules, if any, 
made by the Central Government. 


(2) Every regulations made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 41 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Many Indians are increasingly purchasing exotic animal breeds as pets, 
including canines, felines, and avians that are not suited to the Indian habitat. This 
rising demand has contributed to illegal breeding practices, notably cross- 
breeding and inbreeding of non-native species within the country. 


Cross-breeding within animal species, especially in livestock, has been 
applied to achieve desirable outcomes, such as increased yields. However, this 
practice can also introduce genetic weaknesses that negatively impact animal 
health. Inbreeding is particularly detrimental, as it increases the likelihood of 
genetic disorders, leading to shorter lifespans and reduced disease resistance in 
offspring. 


Commercially bred animals, whether through cross-breeding or inbreeding, 
often suffer from mistreatment and abandonment. Female animals are frequently 
subjected to repeated pregnancies, resulting in nutritionally and genetically 
deficient mothers and offspring that are either abandoned or fail to survive. 


This Bill addresses these critical issues in the animal breeding industry by 
establishing a framework to regulate illegal animal breeding through mandatory 
registration of breeders and animal owners, and by prohibiting the cross-breeding 
and inbreeding of non-native species. The framework promotes a transparent and 
safe import policy and introduces rule-based guidelines on breeding and 
ownership to encourage ethical practices and prevent the mistreatment and 
abandonment of animals. 


By decentralizing regulatory authority to be species-specific, the 
framework aims to address unique challenges associated with different animal 
types and includes legal consequences, including imprisonment, for violations. 
This Bill, along with its accompanying regulations, may also foster a shift in 
demand toward Indian breeds naturally adapted to the country’s climate, 
encouraging humane breeding practices. 


Hence, this bill. 


PRIYANKA CHATURVEDI. 


42 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The registration and licensing of animal breeders; registration of animal owners 
and formation of separate regulatory bodies for each specific by Animal Welfare Board 
of India and Animal Welfare Boards of States shall be undertaken within the funds 
already allocated to them. Hence, no additional expenditure is likely to be incurred for 
carrying out the purposes of this Bill. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 43 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 15 and Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules and the State Government to make regulations for carrying out the purpose of this 
Bill. As the rules and regulations relate to the matters of details only, the delegation of 
the legislative power is of a normal character. 


44 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


vil 


Bill No. XIII of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the constitution of a National Commission for the Welfare and 
Support of Fishermen and for the promotion and development of the 
Fisheries industry, ensuring the welfare of fishermen and the 
fish cultivators, workers etc. engaged in the industry 
and encouraging exports associated with it, 
and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows : — 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the National Commission for Fishermen Short title and 
(Welfare and Support) Act, 2025. meen 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — Definitions. 


(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for the 
Welfare and Support of Fishermen constituted under section 3; 


The National 
Commission 
for the 
Welfare and 
Support of 
Fishermen. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(b) “fish cultivators” means persons engaged in the commercial 
breeding including controlled cultivation and harvesting of fish, 
crustaceans, molluscs and so on, most often for food, in natural or 
psuedo-natural environments such as fish ponds, fish tanks etc.; 


(c) “fisheries industry” means any industry or activity which is 
involved in the management, catching, processing and marketing of 
fish or fish products; 


(dq) "fishermen" means persons who traditionally earns their 
livelihood by catching fish from the ocean/sea or rivers, ponds etc. 
and whose only source of income is the money they earn from 
selling such fish. 


(e) “Fund” means the Fisheries Promotion and Development 
Fund constituted under section 11; and 


(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
CHAPTER II 


THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE WELFARE AND SUPPORT OF 
FISHERMEN 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Commission, to be 
known as the National Commission for the Welfare and Support of 
Fishermen. 


(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, 
and to contract and shall by the said name, sue and be sued. 


(3) The Commission shall consist of the following :— 


(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be 
elected by the House of the People and one by the Council of 
States; 


(c) one member each from the Union Ministry of 
Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying (Department of 
Fisheries); the Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry; 
and the Union Ministry of Finance, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) one member from each of the major fish producing 
States, as may be determined by the Central Government; 


(e) one member each to represent the fishermen, fish 
cultivators, workers and exporters in the fisheries industry 
from each of the major fish producing States, to be 
nominated by the respective State Governments, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; and 


(9 five members to represent such institutes or authorities 
specialising in research in the fisheries industry, aquaculture, 
foreign trade and export, packaging and food safety, to be 
nominated in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The qualifications and experience for appointment as_ the 
Chairperson and members of the Commission, the manner of filling 
of vacancies, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


45 


46 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(5) The Commission shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure. 


(1) The term of office of, salaries, remuneration and other allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson, other members, and officers and staff of the 
Commission shall be such as may be prescribed and enshrined in a 
governing framework to be made within a period not exceeding six 
months from the date of constitution of the Commission. 


(2) Any officer of the Central Government when deputed by that 
Government to the Commission shall have the right to attend the meetings 
of the Commission and take part in the proceedings thereof but shall not 
be entitled to vote. 


No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason 
of :— 


(a) any vacancy in the Commission, as long as fifty per cent. of 
the prescribed membership is filled; or 


(b) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not 
affecting the merits of the case. 


(1) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Commission, 
and without prejudice to any provision of this Act, exercise and discharge 
such other powers and functions of the Commission as may be prescribed. 


(2) In the absence of the Chairperson in a meeting, the meeting of the 
Commission may be chaired by a Deputy Chairperson, who shall be 
elected by a majority of votes of the members of the Commission present 
and voting. 


(1) The Commission may constitute such Advisory Committees or 
Executive Committees, with such composition, as may be prescribed, 
and appoint such number of officers and staff, as it deems necessary, 
for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The method of recruitment and qualifications and experience 
required for the officers and staff of the Commission, shall be such as 
may be prescribed and specified in the governance framework 
mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 4. 


(1) It shall be the duty of the Commission to take all measures necessary 
to promote and develop the fisheries industry in the country. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), the powers and 
functions of the Commission shall include: — 


(a) taking such steps, as it deems necessary, in order to 
achieve its objectives enlisted under section 10 of this Act; 


(b) monitoring exports, imports, prices of fish and allied 
products and propagating data and other information regarding 
the demand for and marketability of fish in both domestic and 
foreign markets; 


(c) supplying scientific and technical advice aimed at 
improving the production, manufacture, supply, and 
distribution of fish and allied products; 


(d) undertaking, assisting or encouraging _ scientific, 
technological and economic research; 


[PART I— 


Term of office 
and conditions 
of service of the 
Chairperson, 
and other 
members and 
officers and 
staff. 


Vacancies, etc., 
not to invalidate 
the proceedings 
of the 
Commission. 


Chairperson to 
preside over the 
meetings. 


Advisory 
Committee, 
Executive 
Committee and 
officers and 
staff of the 
Commission. 


General powers 
and functions. 


Objectives. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(e) collecting statistics from such stakeholders in the 
fisheries industry; 


(9? planning and implementation of human _ resource 
training and skill development in line with the needs of the 
fisheries industry; 


(g) taking steps either by itself or through accredited 
agencies to maintain quality standards for fish or allied products 
produced in the country; 


(h) collaborating and cooperating with national and 
international scientific and economic bodies for the benefit of the 
fisheries industry; 


(i) collaborating and cooperating with departments of the 
Central Government or State Governments on all matters relating to 
the promotion and development of the fisheries industry; 


(6) advising the Central Government on all matters relating to 
the promotion and development of the fisheries industry and its 
workers, including but not limited to the import and export of fish or 
allied products and the safety of fishermen; 


(k) advising the Central Government with regard to 
participation in any international conference or scheme relating to 
the fisheries industry; 


() providing advisory services on matters including but not 
limited to research, testing and training to such other persons 
upon the payment of such fee or other charges as may be 
specified; 


(m) ensuring the development, progress and welfare of poor 
fishermen and enabling them to diversify their income and 
secure a stable income through fishing and related activities; 


(n) studying the effects of climate change on the fisheries 
industry and advising the Central Government on how to cope 
up and mitigate such changes and protect the interests of the 
stakeholders in the fisheries industry and ensure a stable and 
flourishing industry; 


(० preparing and maintaining safety standards for 
fishermen who might be handling dangerous products which 
could affect their health; and 


(p) any other measures in the interest of the fisheries 
industry and its workers. 


CHAPTER III 


PROMOTION AND DEVELOPMENT 


The Central Government and the Commission, as the case may be, while 
exercising its powers, discharging its functions, or undertaking any other 
activity, as specified under this Act shall be guided by the following 
objectives, namely: — 


(a) optimising the production, sale and consumption of fish or 
allied products, which may include: 


(i) promoting the export of fish or allied products; 


(ii) promoting the sale and consumption of fish or allied 
products, including through e-commerce platforms; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(iii) promoting the quality of fish or allied products 
being cultivated and consumed in the country and 
exported; 


(iv) promoting branding, product diversification, value 
addition, packaging and furthering the interests of 
stakeholders involved in the fisheries industry; 


(v) promoting the sustainable cultivation of fish or allied 
products for increasing production and productivity; 


(vi) providing support and encouragement to small 
growers, including in using and implementing new 
technologies; 


(vii) encouraging fair and remunerative prices for 
fishermen and fish cultivators; 


(viii) safeguarding the interests of fishermen; and 


(ix) increasing awareness amongst the general public 
about the fisheries industry; 


(b) promoting economic, scientific and technical research in 
the fisheries industry, which may include:— 


(@) collecting, analysing, and disseminating economic, 
scientific and technical data, information, statistics, and 
studies related to the fisheries industry; 


(ii) encouraging the adoption of best available 
technologies and minimizing the adverse impact of climate 
change; 


(iii) promoting an understanding of the oceanic and 
water ecosystem in India; and 


(iv) aligning the practices in the fisheries industry in 
India with global best practices; 


(c) ensuring the development and welfare of fishermen, which 
may include: — 


(6) conducting a survey of fishermen once in every two 
years, for collecting basic data including but not limited to 
their numbers, annual income, livelihood security, modes of 
alternate income, if any, etc. to gauge their socio-economic 
circumstances, progress, in such manner as may be 
prescribed; 


(ii) make recommendations to the Central Government 
regarding schemes on the basis of these findings and ensure 
the upliftment of those who work in the fisheries industry; 
and 


(iii) make recommendations to the Central 
Government taking into account the different 
circumstances, earnings, living conditions and commercial 
opportunities available to fishermen on the eastern and 
western coast of India respectively. 


10. (J) To achieve the objectives enlisted in section 9, and in exercise of its Issuance of 
general powers and functions under section 8, the Commission may issue कि कर 
directions or advisories to stakeholders, and such persons in the fisheries the 


industry, or any class thereof, as it may deem fit. Commission. 


Fisheries 
Promotion and 
Development 
Fund. 


Power to 
borrow. 


Budget. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


SEC. 2] 


11. 


12. 


13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) Every direction issued by the Commission shall be binding on the 
person to whom such direction has been issued. 


(3) The recommendations of the Commission shall be implemented by 
the Central Government or the concerned State Governments as far as 
possible after due consultations with the Commission. 


CHAPTER IV 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


(1) There shall be established, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
a fund to be called the Fisheries Promotion and Development Fund 
for the purpose of implementing the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government 
and there shall be credited thereto:— 


(a) all sums transferred to, or vested in the Commission; 


(b) any grants and loans made to the Commission by the 
Central Government; 


(c) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificates of 
registration issued and any other fees or charges collected under 
this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder; and 


(d) all sums received by the Commission from such other 
sources as may be decided upon by the Central Government. 


(3) The Fund shall be used to:— 


(a) meet the salary, pension, remuneration, and other 
allowances of the members, officers, and staff of the Commission 
as applicable; 


(b) meet the expenses relating to such measures as the 
Commission may undertake under this Act from time to time in 
order to achieve the objectives enlisted in section 9, and in 
exercise of its general powers and functions under section 8; 


(c) meet the other administrative expenses of the Commission 
and any other expenses authorised by or under this Act; 


(d) repay loans; and 
(e) settle any liabilities arising out of legal proceedings. 


The Commission may, from time to time, with the previous sanction of the 
Central Government and under such conditions as may be prescribed, 
borrow any sum required for any of the purposes for which it is authorised 
to expend under this Act, from:— 


(a) any bank or other financial institution by taking loan; or 


(b) the public by issue of bonds or debentures or any such 
instrument in the form and manner approved by the Central 
Government. 


The Commission shall prepare in such form and manner, at such time, and 
such intervals, as may be prescribed, its budget, showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Commission and forward the same to the 
Central Government. 


The accounts of the Commission shall be maintained and audited in such 
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India, be prescribed and the Commission shall furnish to the Central 


49 


50 


15. 


16. 


17. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Government before such date, as may be prescribed, the audited copy of 
its accounts together with the Auditors’ report thereon. 


(1) The Commission shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such 
time of each financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving 
a full account of its activities during the previous financial year, and 
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government. 


(2) The annual report prepared under sub-section (/) shall contain: - 


(a) a description of all the activities of the Commission during 
the previous financial year; 


(b) the plan of the Commission for the upcoming financial year; 
and 


(c) any such other details as may be provided under any law for 
the time being in force. 


The Central Government shall cause the Annual Accounts of the 
Commission along with the Auditor’s report under section 14 and its 
Annual Report under section 15 to be laid, as soon as may be after they 
are received, before each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
(1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion: — 


(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Commission is 
unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act; or 


(b) that the Commission has persistently made default in 
complying with any direction issued by the Central Government 
under this Act, in achieving the objectives, or in exercising its 
general powers and functions, and as a result of such default the 
financial position of the Commission or the administration of the 
Commission has deteriorated; or 


(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the 
public interest so to do, 


the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
supersede the Commission for such period, not exceeding six months, as 
may be specified in the notification. 


18. The Central Government may by notification in the Official Gazette, 


direct that any power exercisable and functions performed by it under this 
Act may be exercised and performed in such cases and subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, by such officer 
or authority as may be specified therein. 


19. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 


20. 


Government, the Commission, or any officer, member, or employee 
thereof for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith 
under this Act or the rules or regulations made, or standards notified 
thereunder. 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 


[PART I— 


Annual report. 


Auditor’s report 
and annual 
report to be laid 
before 
Parliament. 


Power of the 
Central 
Government to 
supersede the 
Commission. 


Power to 
delegate. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power to make 
rules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


SEC. 2] 


21. 


22. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in 
two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, 
make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as 
may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the 
expiry of three years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in 
force. 


51 


52 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India has a coastline of over 8,000 km and an Exclusive Economic 
Zone (EEZ) of over 2 million square kilometres. With extensive marine 
and freshwater resources, our fisheries industry plays a vital role in the 
economic development of the nation and play an integral part in ensuring 
our food security. 


As per the 2011 census, there are 3,288 marine fishing villages and 
1,511 marine fish landing centres spread across the country. This leaves a 
substantial potential in the area of fisheries unutilized. Additionally, 
approximately 61 per cent. of fishermen live Below Poverty Line as per 
the same census. 


At a time when India is emerging as a forerunner for development 
in the world, and our growth story is being acknowledged globally as a 
model of success to reach five trillion USD economy, the efficient 
development of our fisheries can help us reach our goals in a more holistic 
manner. Presently, we are at number two position globally in the area of 
production of fish or its allied products. With more pointed policy 
imperatives, and a central body such as the National Commission for the 
Welfare and Support of Fishermen to take affirmative steps to promote 
the fisheries sector, India could become number one globally, not just in 
the area of production but also exports. 


Similarly, any development of the fisheries industry must take into 
account those who are involved in its catch, cultivation, production, 
processing and export. Providing equitable benefits to each and every 
section of society is the bedrock of our nation, and the creation of this 
Commission is a step towards achieving that goal. 


In order to keep development in line with the principles of 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat and Make in India, the creation of this Commission 
is necessary. 


Hence, this Bill. 


MASTHAN RAO YADAV BEEDHA 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a National 
Commission for the Welfare and Support of Fishermen and appointment 
of the Chairperson and Members therein. Clause 4 provides for the term 
of office of, salaries, remuneration or other allowances payable to, and the 
other conditions of service of, the Chairperson, other members and 
officers and staff of the Commission. Clause 7 provides for the 
constitution of Advisory Committees and Executive Committees and 
appointment of officers and staff to assist the Commission. Clause 8 of the 
Bill provides for the functions and powers of the Commission including 
inter alia, promotion and development of the fisheries industry in India. 
Clause 9 of the Bill outlines the objectives of the Commission. 


The aforementioned provisions of the Bill involve expenditure 
towards payment of salaries, allowances, etc. of the members, officers, 
and staff of the Commission and meeting other administrative expenses of 
the Commission including expenses for discharging its functions. 


Clause 11 of the Bill provides for the constitution of a fund called 
the Fisheries Promotion and Development Fund for the purpose of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. The Fund will, inter alia 
comprise of the grants and loans given by the Central Government, fees 
collected by the Commission and other sums received by the Commission. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve certain amount of 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible at this stage to estimate the exact quantum of recurring and non- 
recurring expenditure that would be involved. 


53 


54 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to issue orders 
expedient to remove any difficulties which may arise in giving effect to 
the provisions of this Act. 


The matters in respect of which rules, regulations or orders may be 
made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of 
legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Vil 


Bill No. XIV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1951. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) 
Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date, as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


43 of 1951. 2. In section 2 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), 


(i) after sub-clause (bb), the following new sub-clause shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(bbb) “coalition” means a group of two or more political parties 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment 
section 2. 


of 


56 


Insertion of a 3. 
new Chapter 
VIIB. 


Classification 
of electoral 
promise. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


working together for a particular purpose, for a specified time period 
or otherwise, or for the purpose of formation of a Government, 
either before or after an election, to be registered with the Election 
Commission, in such manner as may be prescribed;” 


(ti) after sub-clause (०), the following new sub-clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(ee) “electoral promise” means any commitment, assurance, or 
undertaking made in an election manifesto or public declaration by a 
political party or coalition; 


(eee) “implementation timeline” means the period specified for 
fulfillment of an electoral promise; 


(eeee) “manifesto” means a published declaration of the 
intentions, motives, or views of a political party or coalition ; 


(eeeee) “Monitoring Committee’ means the Manifesto 
Implementation Monitoring Committee constituted under section 
75F of this Act;”; 


In Part V of the principal Act, after Chapter VIA, the following new 
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:— 


“CHAPTER VIIB 
REGULATION OF ELECTION MANIFESTO 


75B. (1) Every political party or coalition shall, within such period as may 
be prescribed, after the announcement of any election to the House of the 
People or the State Legislative Assembly, submit to the Election 
Commission, a manifesto containing electoral promises classified into the 
following categories: — 


(a) Short-term promises to be fulfilled within one year of its term in 
office; 


(b) Medium-term promises to be fulfilled within three years of its 
term in office; and 


(c) Long-term promises to be fulfilled beyond three years of its term 
in office: 


Provided that the period of submission of the manifesto by a 
coalition formed after an election for the purpose of formation of 
Government shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(2) Each electoral promise listed in the manifesto shall be accompanied 
by:— 

(a) specific implementation timeline; 

(b) estimated financial implication; 

(c) proposed source of funding; 

(d) method of implementation; and 


(e) expected outcomes and measurable indicators. 


(3) The Election Commission shall conduct an enquiry, in such manner as 
may be prescribed, and ascertain whether any political party or coalition has 
indulged in willful misrepresentation of facts in its manifesto. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 57 


75C. (1) The ruling party or coalition at the Centre and each State shall 
submit to the Election Commission, a Manifesto Implementation Report, as 
follows, in such form and manner as may be prescribed:— 


(a) Quarterly progress report on implementation of short-term 
promises; 


(b) Half-yearly progress report on implementation of medium-term 
promises; and 


(c) Annual progress report on implementation of long-term 
promises. 


(2) Each progress report shall contain the following:— 
(a) status of implementation of each promise; 
(b) reasons for delay or non-implementation, if any; 
(c) revised timelines for implementation, if applicable; and 


(4) financial expenditure incurred. 


75D. (J) The Election Commission shall maintain a public database 
of:— 


(a) all manifestos submitted by political parties; 


(b) progress reports on implementation of promises in the 
manifestos; and 


(c) reports of the Monitoring Committee submitted under clauses 
(a) and (b) of sub-section (4) of section 75F. 


(2) The database shall be made accessible to the general public through 
a dedicated online portal. 


75E. The non-implementation of electoral promise by the elected political 
party or coalition shall not attract penalties, if caused by:— 


(a) unforeseeable and uncontrollable events beyond the 
Government's reasonable control, which may be termed force majeure 
events, such as natural disasters, war, or other acts of God; 


(b) situations where the Government declares a state of economic 
crisis or emergency, impacting the feasibility of implementing specific 
promises; 


(c) situations where the implementation of electoral promises is 
restricted or prohibited due to constitutional provisions or legal 
limitations; 


(d) instances where the Government lacks the legislative majority to 
pass the required laws or budget for implementing electoral promises; 
and 


(e) circumstances that the Monitoring Committee, constituted under 
section 75F of this Act, considers legitimate and justifiable for non- 
implementation, based on its assessment and evaluation. 


75F. (1) The Election Commission shall constitute a Manifesto 
Implementation Monitoring Committee consisting of:— 


(a) A retired Supreme Court Judge, as Chairperson; 


(b) a nominee of the Chief Election Commissioner, as ex-officio 
Member; 

(c) a nominee of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 
as ex-officio Member; and 


Manifesto 
Implementation 
Report. 


Public 
disclosure. 


Exemptions. 


Constitution and 
functions of the 
Manifesto 
Implementation 
Monitoring 
Committee. 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(d) Two representatives from _ registered civil society 
organizations, with such qualifications and experience and to be 
appointed in such manner and on such terms and conditions, as may 
be prescribed, as Members. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of the service of the Chairperson and members of the 
Commission, other than the ex-officio Members, shall be such as may 
be prescribed. 


(3) The secretarial assistance to the Committee shall be provided by the 
Election Commission, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Monitoring Committee shall:— 


(a) examine the Manifesto Implementation Report and report to the 
Election Commission, the status of the implementation or otherwise of 
the electoral promises contained in the manifesto of the elected political 
party or coalition, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) undertake impartial assessment to evaluate the impact of the 
implemented policies and initiatives outlined in the manifesto of the 
elected political party or coalition and submit its report to the Election 
Commission; 

(c) provide recommendations to the Election Commission for 
improving transparency, accountability, and effectiveness of the 
implementation of manifesto of the elected political party or coalition; 
and 


(६) prepare and submit a comprehensive annual report, detailing its 
findings, analyses, and recommendations and forward the same to the 
Central Government, which shall cause it to be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


Provided that where the report or any of its part is related to any of the 
State Government, a copy of such report shall be forwarded to the Governor 
of that State, who shall in turn, cause to be laid before each House of the 
State Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


Penalties. 75G. (1) Any failure to submit classification of promises by a political party 
or coalition, under sub-section (7) of section 758 of this Act, shall be 
punishable with fine of up to rupees one lakh. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of section 75E, any failure to implement the 
electoral promise by the elected political party or coalition shall be punishable 
with warning in such form and manner as may be prescribed, for the first 
instance; with fine of up to rupees five lakhs for the second instance and with 
fine of up to rupees ten lakhs for subsequent instances. 


(3) If on enquiry, it is established beyond doubt that any political party or 
coalition has indulged in willful misrepresentation of facts in its manifesto, 
such political party or coalition shall be liable to:— 


(a) public censure by the Election Commission, in such manner as 
may be prescribed; 


(b) fine of up to rupees fifty lakhs; and 


(c) mention the same in all future communications with the Election 
Commission the such party for the next five years. 


Recovery of 75H. Any penalty of fine imposed under section 75G shall be recovered by 
penalties. the Election Commission from the political party or coalition within such 
period and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 59 


751. (1) An appeal against the orders of the Election Commission under this 
Chapter shall lie with the High Court having jurisdiction in the matter. 


(2) An appeal shall be filed within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the order of the Election Commission.” 


Appeals. 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


In various landmark judgments including S. Subramaniam Balaji vs. State of 
Tamil Nadu and Others (2013), and Ashwini K Upadhyay vs. Government of 
National Territory of Delhi (2021), the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India addressed 
the issue of electoral manifestos and the promises made by political parties. The 
Court observed that while the distribution of freebies promised in manifestos did 
not necessarily constitute corrupt practices under Section 123 of the Representation 
of the People Act, 1951, such promises could distort the level playing field and 
affect the fairness of elections. The judgment highlighted a legislative vacuum 
regarding the regulation of promises made in manifestos and suggested that 
Parliament should consider enacting laws to address this issue. The Court also 
emphasized that the expenditure on schemes promised in manifestos should serve a 
"public purpose" and align with constitutional principles. 


The Supreme Court had earlier directed the Election Commission of India 
(ECI) to frame guidelines under Article 324 of the Constitution to regulate 
manifestos in the interest of free and fair elections. In compliance with the 
directive, the ECI incorporated specific guidelines for electoral manifestos into the 
Model Code of Conduct (MCC) in 2014. These guidelines require political parties 
and candidates to avoid making financially unsustainable promises. Manifestos 
must clearly state the rationale behind each promise, along with an explanation of 
the expected resource requirements and how these will be met. The definition of 
manifesto in the Bill has been taken from the background note that ECI had 
prepared on the manifestos. Furthermore, promises must be consistent with the 
Directive Principles of State Policy and other constitutional provisions. 


To ensure compliance, the ECI engaged with political parties to discuss the 
inclusion of these guidelines and monitor manifestos for adherence during 
elections. By integrating these measures, the ECI aims to enhance transparency, 
accountability, and faimess in the promises made by political parties, thereby 
upholding the integrity of the electoral process as envisioned in the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court's judgment. However, without existing legislation, there exists a 
significant gap in ensuring the enforceability of these guidelines. The Election 
Commission's efforts while commendable, rely solely on the Model Code of 
Conduct, which is not legally binding. This lack of statutory backing limits the 
Commission's ability to impose penalties or take concrete action against violations, 
resulting in inconsistencies in compliance. The absence of a comprehensive legal 
framework also makes it challenging to hold political parties accountable for non- 
implementation or misrepresentation of promises made in their manifestos. 
Consequently, there is an urgent need for legislation that provides a mechanism for 
regulating electoral promises, ensuring transparency, and accountability to uphold 
the democratic principles of free and fair elections. 


Therefore, this Bill seeks to amend the Representation of the People Act, 
1951, to ensure the legal accountability of electoral promises made by political 
parties and candidates. Recognizing that the absence of enforceable accountability 
has led to a proliferation of unrealistic promises, eroding public trust and distorting 
electoral fairness, the proposed amendments mandate the classification of promises 
with specific timelines, financial implications, and implementation mechanisms, 
ensuring transparency and feasibility. It establishes an efficient monitoring 
framework through the Manifesto Implementation Monitoring Committee, 
composed of eminent legal, electoral and civil society representatives, tasked 
with evaluating progress and recommending corrective measures. The Bill 
introduces provisions for public disclosure of manifestos and implementation 
reports, leading towards citizen engagement and trust. Furthermore, 
it prescribes penalties for non-compliance, including financial sanctions and 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 61 


public censure, while allowing exemptions for legitimate constraints such as force 
majeure events or constitutional limitations. By integrating a structured system for 
assessing and enforcing electoral promises, this amendment aims to strengthen 
democratic governance, enhance political accountability, and uphold the sanctity of 
election manifestos as a binding social contract between parties and the electorate. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


SANT BALBIR SINGH. 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the maintenance of a public database of all 
manifestos submitted by political parties, progress reports on implementation of 
promises in their manifestos; and independent assessments of promise fulfillment, 
which shall be made accessible to the general public through a dedicated online 
portal. It also inter alia provides for the constitution of a Manifesto 
Implementation Monitoring Committee by the Election Commission of India to 
examine the progress and outcomes of the implementation of manifestos of 
political parties, conduct impartial assessment to evaluate the impact of the 
implemented policies and initiatives outlined therein and provide recommendations 
for improving transparency, accountability, and effectiveness in their 
implementation. The composition of the Committee and provision of secretarial 
assistance thereto has also been provided under the said clause. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved at this juncture. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 63 


Bill No. XXXI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Environment (Protection) Amendment Short title and 
Act, 2025 commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Insertion of 2. In the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, after section 17, the 
ae following new Chapter shall be inserted, namely,— 
“CHAPTER वा AA 


COMPENSATION FOR LOSS AND DAMAGE ARISING FROM 
ENVIRONMENTAL AND CLIMATE CHANGE 


Rightto 17. Any person who has incurred loss and damage as a direct 

Compensation: consequence of environmental and climate change impacts shall have 
the right to claim compensation in such form and manner and subject 
to such conditions, as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 


Loss oe 17A. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government 

486 Fund: may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, 
there shall be established for the purposes of this Act, a special 
Fund to be called the Loss and Damage Fund, under the public 
account of India. 


(2) The Loss and Damage Fund shall be credited with such sums 
of money as the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, provide 
from time to time. 


(3) The Loss and Damage Fund shall be applied for the purpose of 
providing financial assistance and compensation to affected persons 
and communities for loss and damage arising from environmental and 
climate change impacts. 


(4) The Loss and Damage Fund shall be under the control of the 
Central Government and managed by such authority and in such 
manner, as the Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint. 


(5) The authority as may be appointed by the Central Government 
under sub-section (4) shall perform such functions as may be notified, 
including, but not limited to,— 


(a) receiving and processing applications for financial 
assistance and compensation on account of loss and damage 
arising from environmental or climate-related causes; 


(b) conducting enquiry and deciding the eligibility and 
quantum of financial assistance and compensation, subject to 
such criteria and in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) sanctioning and ordering disbursal of financial 
assistance and compensation from the Fund; and 


(d) issue necessary directions and performing such other 
functions as may be assigned to it by the Central Government 
or as may be prescribed. 


Accounts and 17B. (1) The authority appointed by the Central Government under 
ee sub-section (4) of section 174 shall maintain separate accounts and 
Fund. other relevant records in relation to the Loss and Damage Fund and 


prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form, as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India. 


(2) The accounting procedure to regulate the manner of crediting the 
monies to the Loss and Damage Fund in a year shall be in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


5 of 1908 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(3) The accounts of the Loss and Damage Fund shall be audited by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be 
specified by him and such audited accounts together with the audit 
report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government. 


17C. The authority appointed by the Central Government under sub- 
section (4) of section /7A shall prepare the annual report in relation to 
the Loss and Damage Fund, giving a full account of its activities, 
defined under this Act, during the previous financial year, in such 
form, as may be prescribed, in each financial year, and submit the 
annual report to the Central Government. 


17D. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together 
with the audit report on accounts to be laid, as soon as may be after 
the reports are received, before each House of Parliament. 


17E. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, empower the Central Pollution Control Board or any other 
agency to conduct enquiry under this Chapter. 


17F. (J) The Central Government or State Government, as the case 
may be, may by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise the 
Court not below the rank of District Court as Loss and Damage 
Tribunal. 


(2) Any person aggrieved by any direction, order or decision of 
the authority as may be appointed under this Chapter may prefer an 
appeal to the Loss and Damage Tribunal, within such period and in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Central Government may prescribe special procedure for 
the Tribunal for the speedy disposal of claims. 


(4) The orders issued by the Tribunal may be enforced as decree 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. 


65 


Annual Report. 


Annual report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 


Competent 
Authority to 
enquire into the 


loss and 
damage. 

Loss and 
Damage 
Tribunal. 


66 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Article 21 of the Constitution which guarantees right to life has been 
interpreted by the Supreme Court to include the right to a clean and healthy 
environment. The ‘polluter pays’ principle-based environmental right, is a 
corollary right which ought to be protected by State in its parens patriae role. 
The right to compensation for the loss and damage arising out of 
environmental and climate change impact, is of much relevance today. 


2. The 27" UN Climate Change Conference (COP 27) where India was a 
party also recognises loss and damage fund to respond to human cost of 
climate change. Loss and Damage Tribunal is a step towards speedy remedy 
in environmental loss and damage claims. 


3. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


A.A. RAHIM. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Section 17A of the Bill provides for establishment of the Loss and Damage 
Fund to provide financial assistance and compensation to affected persons and 
communities for loss and damage arising from environmental and climate change 
impacts. The said section also provides for the Central Government to provide for 
funds to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non- 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved at this stage. 


68 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. XL of 2025 


A Bill to provide for a regulatory regime to oversee and ensure 
quality and ethical practices of educational consultancies in 
the country and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


Short title and 


1. (J) This Act may be called the Educational Consultancies Regulation Act, 
commencement. 


2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Registration of 
Educational 
Consultancies. 


SEC. 2] 


2: 


3. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 69 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Educational Consultancies 
Appellate Tribunal established under section 20; 


(b) "appropriate Government" means,— 


(i) in relation to a Union territory without Legislature, the 
Central Government; and 


(ii) in relation to a State or Union territory with Legislature, 
the Government of that State or Union territory, as the case may 
be; 


(c) “Central Advisory Council” means the Central Advisory 
Council for Educational Consultancies established under section 5; 


(६) "educational consultancy" means any professional service 
rendered by a person or an institution that provides guidance and 
support to its clients including students, parents, educators and 
institutions or others in connection with admission process, 
application procedures, career counselling or related assistance for 
admission in educational institutions in the country or abroad 
including visa assistance, engaging in promotional activities such as 
organising seminars and workshops to showcase educational 
programs and institutions, managing recruitment campaigns etc. for 
the purpose of improving educational outcomes; 


(e) "educational institutions” means schools, colleges, 
universities or institutions imparting educational courses either in in 
the country or abroad; 


(f) “Fund” means the Educational Consultancies Fund 
constituted under section 35 of this Act; 


(g) “fraudulent” shall have the same meaning as has been 
ascribed to it under sub-section (9) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023; 


(h) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(i) "State Council" means the State Council for Educational 
Consultancies established under section 9; and 


(0) "student" means a person who seeks to or is receiving the 
services of an educational consultancy. 


CHAPTER II 
REGISTRATION OF EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES 


(1) Every educational consultancy operating in the country shall, within 
such period from the commencement of this Act, as may be prescribed, or 
within such further period as may be specified, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, by the State Council established under section 7 of this Act, apply 
for registration: Provided that no educational consultancy shall operate after 
the period as provided under sub-section (/), unless a registration thereof 
has been obtained in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every application for registration under sub-section (/) shall be made to 
the State Council concermed, in such form and manner, accompanied by 
such fee and within such time, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The registration granted under sub-section (/) shall be valid for such 
period and may be renewed from time to time in such manner and on 
payment of such fee, as may be prescribed. 


(4) The State Council may, after making such inquiry as it deems fit and 
being satisfied about the eligibility of the applicant, grant or reject the 


45 of 2023. 


70 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


certificate of registration and may, for reasons to be recorded in writing and 
after giving the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard, cancel or 
suspend the registration granted, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


The State Council shall establish and maintain a publicly accessible 
online portal where citizens can verify the registration of educational 
consultancies, including their current status and validity, in such 
manner and in such form, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the portal shall, also display the list of educational 
consultancies, whose application for registration has been rejected and 
whose registration has been cancelled or otherwise rendered void. 


CHAPTER III 
CENTRAL ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES 


(1) The Central Government shall, within a period of one year from 
commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a Council to be known as the Central Advisory Council for 
Educational Consultancies to exercise the powers conferred on it and 
to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


The Central Advisory Council shall be a body corporate by the name 
aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a common seal, and shall, by 
the said name, sue or be sued. 


(2) The headquarters of the Central Advisory Council shall be at New 
Delhi. 


(3) The Central Advisory Council shall consist of the following, 
namely:— 


(6) the Union Minister of Education — Chairperson, ex- 
officio; 

(ii) representatives of the Union Ministries of Finance; 
Corporate Affairs, and Law and Justice; Department of 
Consumer Affairs and Niti Aayog, to be appointed by the Central 
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed — Members ex- 
officio: 


Provided that one representative of any other Union 
Ministry or Department may also be additionally appointed as an 
ex-officio Member by the Central Government, if so deemed 
necessary by the Central Advisory Council, in such manner as 
may be prescribed; 


(iii) five ex-officio Members, one each to be nominated by 
the State Governments, , in such manner and for such term as may 
be prescribed, on rotational basis from amongst all States, to 
ensure that all States get due representation: 


Provided that the five States which get to nominate 
members for a given term shall be determined by draw of lot and 
the States which have been selected through previous draw(s) of 
lot will not be included in the next draw of lot; 


(iv) five ex-officio Members, one each to be nominated by 
the State Councils for Educational Consultancies, in such manner 
and for such term as may be prescribed, on rotational basis from 
amongst all the State Councils, to ensure that all State Councils 
get due representation: 


Provided that the five State Councils, which get to 
nominate members for a given term shall be determined by draw 
of lot and the State Councils which have been selected through 


Portal for 
verification of 
registration of 
educational 
consultancies. 
Establishment of 
the Central 
Advisory 
Council for 
Educational 
Consultancies. 


Term of office 
and other 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
Central 
Advisory 
Council. 


Officers and 
staff of the 
Central 
Advisory 
Council. 


Functions of the 
Central 
Advisory 
Council. 


Establishment of 
the State 
Council for 
Educational 
Consultancies. 


SEC. 2] 


8. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 71 


previous draw(s) of lot will not be included in the next draw of 
lot; and 


(v) not more than ten Members to represent the interests of 
the educational consultancies industry and higher education 
sector to be appointed by the Central Government, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) The Central Advisory Council shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure for transaction of its business and frame regulations, as deemed 
necessary, for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(1) The members of the Central Advisory Council, other than the ex-officio 
members, shall hold office for such term, as may be prescribed. 


(2) The allowances payable to the Chairperson and ex-officio members, 
the salaries and allowances payable to the members, other than the ex- 
officio members, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and members of the Central Advisory Council shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


(1) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Central 
Advisory Council, appoint such number of officers and staff, as may be 
necessary, for the efficient discharge of the functions assigned to it 
under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff of the 
Central Advisory Council so appointed, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


The functions of the Central Advisory Council shall be to advise and make 
recommendations to the Central Government— 
(a) on all matters concerning the implementation of this Act; 


(b) on major questions of policy related to educational 
consultancies; 


(c) for the protection of interests of students; 


(d) to foster the growth and development of the educational 
consultancies sector; and 


(e) on any other matter related to the educational consultancies 
sector or the education sector in general, as may be assigned to it by 
the Central Government. 


CHAPTER IV 
STATE COUNCIL FOR EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES 
(1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a State Council for Educational Consultancies in 
each State and Union Territory to be known as the (name of the 


State/Union territory) Council for Educational Consultancies, to 
perform the functions assigned to it under the Act. 


(2) The State Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid 
having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall, by the said name, 
sue or be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the State Council shall be at such place, as the 
appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint. 


72 


10. 


11. 


12. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(4) The State Council shall have the power to regulate its own procedure 
for transaction of its business and frame regulations, as deemed necessary, 
for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(1) The State Council shall consist of a Chairperson and not less than 
four other Members to be appointed by the appropriate Government, 
in such manner as may be prescribed, from amongst persons having 
adequate knowledge of and professional experience in the management 
of educational institutions, on the recommendations of a Selection 
Committee: 


Provided that a person who is, or has been, in the service of the 
State Government shall not be appointed as Chairperson of the State 
Council, unless such person has held the post of Additional Secretary 
to the Central Government or any equivalent post in the Central 
Government or State Government: 


Provided further that a person who is, or has been, in the service 
of the State Government shall not be appointed as a member of the 
State Council, unless such person has held the post of Secretary to the 
State Government or any equivalent post in the State Government or 
Central Government. 


(2) The Selection Committee shall consist of the following, namely— 


(a) Chief Justice of the High Court concerned or a person 
nominated by him in this behalf, in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Chairperson; 


(b) Secretary of the Ministry of Education of the State 
Government - Member; ; and 


(c) Secretary of the Department of Law of the State 
Government - Member: 


(3) The Selection Committee shall regulate its own procedure in a 
transparent manner for selecting the Chairperson and Members of the State 
Council. 


(4) The Selection Committee, while screening potential candidates and 
before making recommendations for their appointment as Chairperson or 
member of the State Council, shall satisfy that such person does not have 
any financial, pecuniary or other interest, as is likely to affect prejudicially 
their function in such capacity, and such findings of the Selection 
Committee shall be recorded in writing. 


(1) The Chairperson and Members of the State Council shall hold office for 
a term not exceeding five years from the date upon which they enter their 
office, or until they attain the age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier, 
and shall not be eligible for re-appointment. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members of the State 
Council, shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to 
their disadvantage during their tenure. 


(J) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/) of section 11, 
the Chairperson or a Member of the State Council, as the case may be, may, 
by writing under his hand to the appropriate Government, resign from his 
office, by giving a notice to that effect of not less than three months, in the 
prescribed form and on acceptance of the same, the resignation shall take 
effect and the office of the Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, 


Composition of 
the State 
Council. 


Term of office 
and other 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
State Council. 


Resignation and 
Removal. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 73 


Restrictions on 13. 


employment of 
Chairperson and 
Members after 
cessation of 
office. 


shall become vacant: 


Provided that in the case of a Member, the resignation shall be routed 
through the Chairperson of the State Council. 


(2) The appropriate Government may, , by order, remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any Member of the State Council, if the Chairperson or such 
other Member, as the case may be,— 


(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, 
involving moral turpitude; or 


(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a 
competent Court; or 


(d) refuses toa act or has become physically or mentally incapable 
of acting as a Member; or 


(e) has acquired such financial or other interest which is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions; or 


(f) has, in the opinion of the appropriate Government, so abused 
his office as to render his continuance in office detrimental to the 
interest of the office or public interest: 


Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be 
removed from his office on the grounds specified under clause (e) or 
(f) of sub-section (2) except after an inquiry made by a Judge of the 
High Court in which such Chairperson or Member has been informed 
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard in respect of those charges. 


(3) Any vacancy caused under sub-sections (/) and (2) shall be filled up 
within a period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs: 


Provided that the Chairperson or any other member appointed against a 
casual vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term of the 
Chairperson or member in whose place he has been appointed. 


(1) The Chairperson or a Member of the State Council, ceasing to hold 
office as such, shall not — 


(a) accept any employment in, or connected with, the 
management or administration of, any person or organisation which 
has been associated with any work under this Act, from the date on 
which he ceases to hold office: 


Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any 
employment under the appropriate Government or a local authority or 
in any statutory authority or any corporation established by or under 
any Central, State or provincial Act or a Government Company, as 
defined under clause (45) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, 
which is not a promoter as per the provisions of this Act; or 


(b) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation in 
connection with any specific proceeding or transaction or negotiation 
or a case to which the State Council is a party and with respect to 
which the Chairperson or such Member had, before cessation of 
office, acted for or provided advice to the State Council; or 


(c) give advice to any person using information which was 
obtained in his capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and being 
unavailable to or not being able to be made available to the public; or 


18 of 2013. 


45 of 2023. 


74 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(d) enter into a contract of service with or accept an appointment 
to a Board of Directors of, or accept an offer of employment with, an 
entity with which he had direct and significant official dealings during 
his term of office as such. 


(2) The Chairperson and Members shall not communicate with or reveal to 
any person any matter which had been brought under his consideration or 
known to him while acting as such. 


No act or proceeding of the State Council shall be questioned or shall be 
invalid merely by reason of— 


(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the State 
Council; or 


(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as Chairperson or 
Member thereof; or 


(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the State Council not 
affecting the merits of the case. 


(1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the State 
Council, appoint such number of officers and staff, as may be necessary, 
for the efficient discharge of the functions assigned to it and the powers 
conferred on it under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and 
other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and staff of the 
State Council so appointed, shall be such as may be prescribed. 


The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the State Council shall be 
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub- 
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


(1) The State Council shall perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely— 
(a) register and regulate educational consultancies registered 
under this Act in accordance with the procedure laid down under 
section 3; 


(b) publish and maintain a website or online portal of records, 
for public viewing, of all educational consultancies for which 
registration has been given, with such details as may be prescribed, 
including information provided in the application based on which 
registration has been granted; 


(c) receive, record and address the grievances submitted by any 
aggrieved person about the conduct of any educational consultancy, 
whether registered or unregistered; 


(dq) maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and 
enter the names and photographs of promoters of educational 
consultancies, who have been identified by the State Council to have 
avoided registration under the Act; 


(e) maintain a database, on its website, for public viewing, and 
enter the names and photographs of promoters of educational 
consultancies who have applied and registered under this Act, with 
such details as may be prescribed, including those whose registration 
has been rejected or revoked; 


(f) ensure compliance of its regulations or orders or directions 
made in exercise of its powers under this Act and take appropriate 
action against those found to be in contravention thereof; 


Vacancies, 
etc. not to 
invalidate 
acts or 
proceedings 
of the State 
Council. 


Officers and 
staff of the 
State 
Council. 


Chairperson, 
Members, 
officers and staff 
of the State 
Council to be 
public servants. 


Functions of the 
State Council. 


Powers of the 
State Council. 


State Council to 
have powers of a 
Civil Court. 


Establishment of 
the Educational 
Consultancies 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 


SEC. 2] 


18. 


19. 


20. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 75 


(g) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by 
the appropriate Government, as may be necessary to carry out the 
purposes of this Act; 


(h) assess educational consultancies for their compliance to the 
regulations framed under the Act; examine the qualifications and 
experience of the consultants of the educational consultancies and 
ensure that they maintain the requisite standards of service; and 


(i) any other function, as may be assigned to it by the 
appropriate Government, from time to time. 


(2) A complainant may approach the State Council and register a complaint 
therewith in the prescribed form and manner and the State Council shall 
endeavour to adjudicate on the complaint, preferably within one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of registration of the complaint. 


(1) The State Council shall have the following powers, namely:— 


(a) formulate regulations under the Act and issue directions for 
the implementation of the provisions of the Act, as deemed necessary; 


(b) carry out regular inspections to monitor educational 
consultancies; 


(c) deregister educational consultancies that do not comply with 
the rules and regulations framed hereinunder; and 


(d) impose penalty for offences committed under this Act or 
whoever acts in contravention of the Act, rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 


(2) The State Council shall, while exercising the powers given under sub- 
section (1), be guided by the principles of natural justice and, the provisions 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder. 


The State Council shall, while investigating complaints received under sub- 
section (2) of section 17 and exercising the powers conferred under section 
18, have all the powers of a Civil Court trying a suit and in particular, in 
respect of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from 
any part of India and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(६) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and 
documents; and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER V 
EDUCATIONAL CONSULTANCIES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 


(1) The appropriate Government shall, within a period of one year from 
the date of commencement of this Act, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the — (name 
of the State/Union Territory) Educational Consultancies Appellate 
Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the Appellate Tribunal). 


(2) The appropriate Government may, if it deems necessary, establish 
one or more benches of the Appellate Tribunal, for various 
jurisdictions, in a State or Union Territory, as the case may be. 


76 


21. 


22. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(3) The appropriate Government of two or more States or Union 
Territories may, if they deem fit, establish one single Appellate 
Tribunal: 


Provided that, until the establishment of an Appellate Tribunal under 
this section, the appropriate Government shall designate, by order, any 
Appellate Tribunal functioning under any law for the time being in force, to 
be the Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals under the Act: 


Provided further that after the Appellate Tribunal under this section is 
established, all matters pending with the Appellate Tribunal designated to 
hear appeals, shall stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal so established 
and shall be heard from the stage such appeal is transferred. 


(1) The appropriate Government or the competent authority or any person 
aggrieved by any direction or order or decision of the State Council under 
this Act may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction 
over the matter. 


(2) Every appeal made under sub-section (४) shall be preferred within a 
period of sixty days from the date on which a copy of the direction or order 
or decision made by the State Council is received by the appropriate 
Government or the competent authority or the aggrieved person and it shall 
be in such form and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after 
the expiry of sixty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for 
not filing it within that period. 


(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section (/), the Appellate Tribunal 
may after giving the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass 
such orders, including interim orders, as it thinks fit. 


(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to 
the parties and to the State Council. 


(5) The appeal preferred under sub-section (/), shall be dealt with by the 
Appellate Tribunal, as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be 
made by it to dispose of the appeal within a period of sixty days from the 
date of receipt of such appeal: 


Provided that where any such appeal could not be disposed of within 
the said period of sixty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons 
in writing for not disposing of the appeal within that period.. 


(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality 
or propriety or correctness of any order or decision of the State Council , on 
its own motion or otherwise, call for the records relevant to deposing of such 
appeal and make such orders as it thinks fit. 


(1) Every bench of the Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson and not less than two whole time Members, of which one 
shall be a Judicial member and other shall be a Technical or 
Administrative Member, to be appointed by the appropriate 
Government. 


(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson and other Members of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be 
varied to their disadvantage during their tenure. 


Appeals to the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 


Composition of 
the Appellate 
Tribunal. 


SEC. 2] 


Qualifications 23. 


for appointment 
as Chairperson 
and Members of 
the Appellate 
Tribunal. 


Officers and 24. 


staff of the 
Appellate 
Tribunal. 


Chairperson, 25. 


Members, 
officers and staff 
of the Appellate 
Tribunal to be 
public servants. 


Powers of the 26. 


Appellate 
Tribunal. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 77 


(1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a 
Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he,— 


(a) in the case of Chairperson, is or has been a Judge of a High 
Court; 


(b) in the case of a Judicial Member, he has held a judicial office 
in the territory of India for at least fifteen years or has been a member 
of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post of Additional 
Secretary of that service or any equivalent post, or has been an 
advocate for at least twenty years; and 


(c) in the case of a Technical or Administrative Member, he is a 
person who is well-versed in the field and possesses experience of at 
least twenty years in the educational services field or who has held a 
post in the Central Government or a State Government equivalent to 
the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or an 
equivalent post in the State Government. 


(2) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the 
appropriate Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court or his nominee. 


(3) The Judicial Members and Technical or Administrative Members of 
the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the appropriate Government 
on the recommendations of a Selection Committee consisting of the Chief 
Justice of the High Court or his nominee, the Secretary of the Department 
handling Housing in the appropriate Government and the Law Secretary 
in the appropriate Government. 


(1) The appropriate Government shall provide to each bench of the 
Appellate Tribunal with such number of officers and staff, as may be 
considered necessary, to assist it in its efficient functioning. 


(2) The method of recruitment and the qualifications and experience of 
as well as the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of, the officers and staff, so appointed to assist the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed. 


The Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of 
the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of sub- 
section (2) of section 28 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 


(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down 
by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles 
of natural justice. 


(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall have 
power to regulate its own procedure. 


(3) The Appellate Tribunal shall also not be bound by the rules of evidence 
contained in the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 


(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its 
functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 


(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


45 of 2023. 


5 of 1908. 


47 of 2023. 


5 of 1908. 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


5 of 1908. 


78 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
documents; 


(e) reviewing its decisions; 
(f) dismissing an application for default or directing it ex parte; and 
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed. 


(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be 
judicial proceedings for the purposes of the relevant provisions of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 relating to offences affecting the 
administration of justice; and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be 
a civil court for the purposes of the relevant provisions of the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 relating to the procedure for prosecution in 
such cases. 


(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the High Court concerned, within a period 
of sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or order of the 
Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified in 
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908: 


Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry 
of the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the 
specified period. 


(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate 
Tribunal with the consent of the parties. 


CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENTS 


If any educational consultancy , contravenes the provisions of section 3, it 
shall be guilty of the offence of “unauthorised operation of educational 
consultancy” and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend up to two years, or with fine of one lakh rupees, or with both. 


Any educational consultancy which, by misrepresentation or through 
fraudulent means, induces a student to pay fees or other charges under the 
pretence of securing admission to an educational institution or employment, 
shall be guilty of the offence of “misrepresentation and fraudulent 
practices” and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend up to three years, or with fine of two lakh and fifty thousand rupees, 
or with both. 


Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with the responsibility to provide 
educational consultancy services, or having carried out such 
responsibilities, dishonestly fails to deliver or misappropriates those 
services, or dishonestly uses or neglects the provision of those services in 
violation of any legal obligation, direction, or contractual agreement, 
express or implied, related to the discharge of such trust, or wilfully allows 
any other person to do so, shall be guilty of the offence of “breach of trust 
amounting to cheating” and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend up to five years, or with fine of one lakh rupees, or with 
both. 


Any person who wilfully obstructs or hinders the functioning of the State 
Council or its officers in the exercise of their duties under this Act shall be 
guilty of the offence of “Obstruction of the functioning of the State Council” 
and shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend up 
to two years, or a fine of one lakh rupees, or with both. 


Appeals to High 
Court. 


Unauthorised 
operation of 
educational 
consultancy. 


Misrepresentation 
and Fraudulent 
Practices. 


Breach of trust 
amounting to 
cheating. 


Obstruction of the 
functioning of the 


State Council. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Grants and loans 
by the Central 
Government. 


Grants and loans 
by the State or 
Union _ territory 
Government. 


Constitution of 


Fund. 


SEC. 2] 


32. 


33. 


34. 


35. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 79 


(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time, the offence was committed was in charge of, 
or was responsible to the company for the conduct of, the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section, shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment under this Act if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or 
is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purpose of this section,— 


(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm, 
or other association of individuals; and 


(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament in this behalf, make to the Central Advisory Council and 
the State Council of the Union territories without Legislature, grants 
and loans of such sums of money as that Government may think fit for 
being utilised for the purposes of this Act. 


The State or Union territory Government may, after due appropriation 
made by State or Union territory Legislature, as the case may be, by 
law in this behalf, make to the State Council concerned, grants and 
loans of such sums of money as the State or Union territory 
Government may think fit for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a fund to be called the 
‘Educational Consultancies Fund’ and there shall be credited thereto,— 


(a) all Government grants received by the State Council; 
(b) the fees received under this Act; 


(c) the interest accrued on the amounts referred to in clauses (a) 
to (b). 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting— 


(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and 
other Members and the administrative expenses including the salaries 
and allowances payable to the officers and other employees of the 
State Council and the Appellate Tribunal; 


(b) the other expenses of the State Council in connection with 
the discharge of its functions and for the purposes of this Act. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered by a Committee of such Members of the 
State Council as may be determined by the Chairperson of that Council. 


80 


36. 


37. 


38. 


39. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(4) The Committee appointed under sub-section (3) shall spend monies out 
of the Fund for carrying out the objects for which the Fund has been 
constituted. 


(1) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the State Council or 
the Appellate Tribunal, in the Union Territories, shall be credited to the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


(2) All sums realised, by way of penalties, imposed by the State Council or 
the Appellate Tribunal, in a State, shall be credited to such account as the 
State Government may specify 


(1) The State Council shall prepare a budget, maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such 
form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government in consultation 
with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the State Council shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor General of India or bat such intervals as may be specified by 
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the State Council to the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act 
shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in connection with 
such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular shall 
have the right to demand and production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers, and to inspect any of the offices 
of the State Council. 


(4) The accounts of the State Council, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to 
the appropriate Government by the State Council and the appropriate 
Government shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the case may be, before 
the State Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of 
two Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that 
House. 


(1) The State Council shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such 
time of each financial year, as may be prescribed by the appropriate 
Government, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during 
the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the appropriate 
Government. 


(2) A copy of the report received under sub-section (/) shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament or, as the 
case may be, before each House of the State Legislature or the Union 
territory Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The State Council may, from time to time, with the approval of the 
appropriate Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules 


Crediting sums 
realised by way 
of penalties to 
the Consolidated 
Fund of India or 
State Account. 


Budget, 
Accounts and 
Audit. 


Annual Report. 


Power of the 
appropriate 

Government to 
make rules and 
of the State 
Council to make 
regulations. 


SEC. 2] 


Act to have 40. 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 41. 
remove 
difficulties. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 81 


made thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary 
or expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made 
by the State Council of the Union territories without Legislature under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule. Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not 
be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or 
be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 


(4) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union Territory 
Government, as the case may be and every regulation made by the State 
Council of the State Government or the Union Territory Government, as the 
case may be, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of the State Legislature or the Union Territory 
Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry 
of five years from the commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


82 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Educational consultancies in India are organizations or individuals that offer 
professional advice and support to students seeking higher education opportunities, 
both within the country and abroad. In India, educational consultancies play a 
significant role due to the diverse and often complex landscape of educational 
opportunities available across different regions and disciplines. Their core 
functions include assisting students in selecting appropriate educational 
institutions, navigating admission processes, and completing application 
procedures. They also provide services such as career counselling, entrance exam 
preparation, and visa assistance for studying abroad. These consultancies may also 
engage in promotional activities to showcase educational programs and institutions, 
organizing seminars and workshops to inform and attract potential students. 
Furthermore, they assist educational institutions by managing recruitment 
campaigns and facilitating connections with prospective students. 


As the number and influence of these consultancies grow, there is a need for 
a regulatory body to ensure quality and ethical practices. This Bill outlines the 
features and structure of a Central Advisory Council for Educational Consultancies 
and a State Council for Educational Consultancies in each State and Union territory 
to oversee and regulate the functioning of educational consultancies in India and 
makes their registration mandatory. The Bill also provides a grievance redressal 
mechanism for the general public within the structure of the State Council and for 
an Appellate Tribunal in each State and Union territory to hear and decide on 
appeals against the decisions of the State Council. Offences by educational 
consultancies and penalties for each such offence has also been well-defined in the 
Bill for strict compliance of the provisions thereof. With a well-defined structure 
and comprehensive features, the regulatory mechanism proposed for educational 
consultancies and the services rendered by them would ensure ethical practices in 
the industry, protect the interests of students and parents, and contribute to the 
overall improvement of the educational landscape in India. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above-mentioned objectives. 


A.A. RAHIM. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment and maintenance of a 
publicly accessible online portal registration status and other relevant details of 
educational consultancies by the State Council. Clause 5 provides for the 
establishment of a Central Advisory Council for Educational Consultancies 
whereas Clause 6 provides for the salary and allowances as well as other conditions 
of service of the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 7 of the Bill provides 
for the officers and staff of the Central Advisory Council and for the salary and 
allowances payable to them as well as the other conditions of their service. Clause 
9 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a State Council for Educational 
Consultancies in each State and Union territory. Clause 10 of the Bill provides for 
the composition of the State Council whereas Clause 11 provides for the salary and 
allowances payable to and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
Members thereof. Clause 15 provides for the officers and staff of the State Council 
and for the salary and allowances payable to them as well as the other terms and 
conditions of their service. Clause 20 provides for the establishment of an 
Educational Consultancies Appellate Tribunal in each State and Union territory to 
adjudicate disputes and hear appeals arising out of the decisions of the State 
Council. Clause 22 of the Bill provides for the composition of the Appellate 
Tribunal and for the salary and allowances payable to and other conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and Members thereof. Clause 24 of the Bill provides 
for such number of officers and staff as may be required to assist the Appellate 
Tribunal and for the salary and allowances payable to them and for the other 
conditions of their service. Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the Central 
Government to provide adequate funds to the Central Advisory Council and the 
State Council of the Union territories without Legislature to aid its efficient 
functioning. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult to estimate the exact quantum of expenditure likely to be involved at this 
stage. 


83 


84 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 39 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to frame 
rules and the State Council to frame regulations with the approval of the 
appropriate Government for implementation of the provisions of this Act. Clause 
41 provides that the Central Government may, make such provisions, by order, as 
may be necessary for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of 
this Bill. As the matters in respect of which rules or regulations or orders may 
be made are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not 
practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself, the delegation of legislative 
power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 85 


Bill No. LXVII of 2025 


A Bill to provide employees with the right to disconnect from work-related 
communications outside working hours by establishing 
comprehensive framework for work-life balance to 
protect the mental health and well-being of 
employee, and to ensure equitable labour 
practices in the digital age and for 
matters connected therewith 


or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Right to Disconnect Act, 2025. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 


notification in the official Gazette, appoint. 


86 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Definitions. 2. Inthis Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) "appropriate Government" means the Central Government in 
respect of establishments falling under its jurisdiction, and the State 
Government in respect of other establishments; 


(b) "digital wellness" means and includes the pursuit of an optimal 
balance between digital technology use and physical and mental well- 
being for a life with human dignity; 


(c) "employee" shall have the same meaning as defined in clause 


(26) of section 2 of the Code on Social Security, 2020; AB 02020 
(d) "employer" shall have the same meaning as defined in clause 

(m) of section 2 of the Industrial Relations Code, 2020; 35 of 2020. 
(e) “performance appraisal” means and includes the performance 

appraisal evaluations in any form carried out by the employer; 
(f) “policy” means the Right to Disconnect policy to be 

formulated and implemented by every employer under section 4 of 

this Act; 
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(h) “working hours" shall have the same meaning as has been 

provided in Chapter VII of the Occupational Safety, Health and 

Working Conditions Code, 2020; 37 of 2020. 


(i) "work-related communication" includes but is not limited to: 


(i) emails, text messages, instant messages, and voice 
messages; 


(ii) phone calls and video calls; 
(iii) notifications from work applications and software; and 


(iv) any form of digital or electronic communication initiated 
by the employer, supervisors, colleagues, or clients related to 
work matters. 


CHAPTER II 


RIGHT TO DISCONNECT 


Right of 3. (1) Every employee shall have the right to disconnect from work-related 

employees td communications outside of working hours, on weekly holidays, public 

disconnect. 5 é ५ ६ है ल्‍ 
holidays, and during periods of sanctioned leave subject to the exclusions 
and limitations specifically provided under this Act and the rules made 
thereunder. 


(2) The employer shall not take any action including retrenchment, 
disciplinary action, penalties during performance appraisal, or any other 
adverse consequence for exercising the right guaranteed under sub- 
section (/). 


(3) The right to disconnect means and shall include: 


(a) the right to not respond to work-related communications 
outside working hours, on weekly holidays, public holidays and during 
periods of sanctioned leave; 


(b) the right to not be penalized for delayed responses to non- 
urgent communications; 


(c) the right to have personal time respected and protected; and 


(d) the right to mental rest and recuperation. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 87 


(4) Any limitation under sub-section (/) shall be: 


(a) clearly specified in the employment contract, in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 


(b) reasonable and proportionate; 


(c) accompanied by appropriate compensation, as may be 
prescribed; and 


(d) subject to periodic review. 
CHAPTER III 
DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS OF EMPLOYERS 


4. (/) Every employer employing ten or more employees shall, within six 
months from the date of commencement of this Act, formulate and 
implement a comprehensive Right to Disconnect policy in consultation with 
employee representatives or recognized trade unions, as the case may be, in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The policy shall include: 
(a) clearly defined working hours and availability periods; 


(b) specific modes and timing of permissible after-working 
hours communication; 


(c) detailed emergency contact protocols and definitions; 


(d) response time expectations for different types of 
communication; 


(e) grievance redressal mechanisms and complaint procedures; 
(f) disciplinary measures for policy violations; 


(g) digital wellness programs and mental health support 
initiatives; and 
(h) regular policy review and update mechanisms. 
(3) The policy shall be: 


(a) notified and filed with the Labour Commissioner having 
competent jurisdiction within thirty days of its formulation: 


Provided that the Labour Commissioner concerned shall ensure 
that the policy is strictly complied with by all employers under his 
jurisdiction and shall take necessary action for non-compliance, in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) made accessible to all employees in multiple languages as 
may be prescribed; 


(c) displayed prominently at the workplace and on company 
digital platforms; 


(d) included in employee handbooks and induction programs; 
and 


18 of 2013. (e) included as a compliance report under the Companies Act, 
2013. 


5. Every employer shall implement necessary measures to promote digital 
wellness including: 


(9) training programs on healthy technology use; 


Mandatory 
Right to 
Disconnect 
policy. 


Employer 
obligations for 
digital wellness. 


88 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(b) periodic digital detox initiatives; 
(c) ergonomic assessments for remote and hybrid workers; 


(4) mental health support services and counseling facilities; 
and 


(e) regular surveys to assess work-life balance satisfaction. 
Prohibition of 6. No employer shall: 
action against 
employee. (a) terminate, demote, or take any disciplinary action against an 
employee; 


(b) reduce wages, benefits, or opportunities for career 
advancement; 


(c) create a hostile work environment; and 


(d) exclude employees from meetings, projects, or communi- 
cations as punishment; 


for exercising their right to disconnect in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the policy formulated and implemented. 


CHAPTER IV 
ENFORCEMENT AND COMPLIANCE 


Grievance 7. (1) Every establishment shall establish an Internal Grievance 


ae tees Committee comprising of twelve members: 
mechanism. 


(a) with six members to be nominated by the employer and 
five members to be nominated by the employees, in such manner 
as may be prescribed; and 


(b) one member, who shall be 4 psychologist, to be 
nominated by the employer possessing such qualifications and 
experience and in such manner and with such salary or 
allowances and on such terms and conditions, as may be 
prescribed. 


(2) Any aggrieved employee may file a complaint with the Intemal 
Grievance Committee, in such form and manner as may be prescribed, who 
shall, after due inquiry and process conducted in such manner as may be 
prescribed, render a written decision within fifteen days from the date of 
receipt of the complaint. 


(3) If the finding of the Internal Grievance Committee is against the 
employer, then the employer shall be liable to a fine up to fifty thousand 
rupees, which shall be paid to the complainant: 


Provided that no such fine shall be imposed without giving the employer 
concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


CHAPTER V 
PENALTIES 


Penalties for 8. Every employer failing to formulate or implement a disconnection policy as 


setae provided under section 4 shall be liable to: 
compliance. 


(a) a fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but 
may extend to two lakh rupees; and 


(b) in case of continued non-compliance even after receipt of 
notice from the Labour Commissioner, an additional fine of two 
thousand rupees for each day such non-compliance is continued. 


SEC. 2] 


9. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 89 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The appropriate Government shall prepare once every year, as may be 
prescribed, and publish an annual report including therein:— 


(a) implementation status of this Act across various sectors 
within their jurisdiction; 


(b) the levels of compliance and details of enforcement actions; 


(c) impact assessment on employee well-being and productivity; 
and 


(d) recommendations for policy improvements. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall cause a copy of the annual report to 
be laid, as the case may be, before each House of Parliament or each House 
of the State legislature, where it consists of two Houses or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


The appropriate Government, shall from time to time, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case 
may be, by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds for carrying out 
the purposes of this Act. 


(J) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State 
Governments, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The State Governments may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for matters falling within their respective jurisdiction, provided 
such rules shall not be inconsistent with this Act or the rules made by the 
Central Government. 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as 
the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall 
be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
rule. 


(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 
where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 


(J) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, make such order, not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary for removing such 
difficulty: 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three 
years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of 
this Act. 


Annual 
reporting and 
evaluation. 


Appropriate 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Act not in 
derogation and 
to supplement 
other laws. 


90 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The rapid digitization of workplaces and the proliferation of communication 
technologies have fundamentally transformed the nature of work in India. While 
these developments have brought numerous benefits, they have also created an 
"always-on" culture that blurs the boundaries between work and personal life, 
leading to significant mental health challenges, increased stress levels, and 
deteriorating work-life balance among employees. 


Recent studies indicate that over 80 per cent. of Indian professionals report 
experiencing work-related stress outside of normal working hours, with particularly 
severe impact on women, young professionals, and those in the information 
technology sector. The COVID-19 pandemic has further exacerbated these issues, 
with remote work arrangements often leading to extended working hours and 
constant connectivity expectations. 


International best practices from countries such as France, Belgium, Portugal, 
and Australia demonstrate that legislative frameworks establishing the Right to 
Disconnect can effectively protect employee welfare while maintaining business 
efficiency. The European Union has also recognized the Right to Disconnect as a 
fundamental digital right for workers. 


This Bill seeks to address these challenges by establishing a comprehensive 
legal framework that: 


० Recognizes the fundamental right of employees to disconnect from 
work-related communications outside working hours; 


० Establishes clear obligations for employers to respect this right and 
implement appropriate policies; 


० Provides robust enforcement mechanisms including penalties for 
violations and protection against retaliation; 


० Promotes digital wellness and mental health support in workplaces; 


० Balances business needs with employee welfare through reasonable 
exceptions and sector-specific guidelines; and 


० Ensures comprehensive coverage including traditional employees, gig 
workers, and platform workers. 


The Bill aims to create a healthier, more productive workforce while 
positioning India as a progressive nation that values both technological 
advancement and human well-being. By codifying the right to disconnect, India 
can lead by example in addressing the challenges of the digital age while 
maintaining its competitive edge in the global economy. 


The proposed legislation is expected to benefit millions of workers across 
sectors, reduce workplace stress and burnout, improve family relationships and 
social cohesion, and ultimately contribute to a more sustainable and equitable 
model of economic growth. 


Hence, this Bill. 
A. A. RAHIM. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides that every employer shall implement 
necessary measures to promote digital wellness amongst its employees including 
training programs on healthy technology use, periodic digital detox initiatives, 
ergonomic assessments for remote and hybrid workers, mental health support 
services and counselling facilities and regular surveys to assess work-life balance 
satisfaction. Sub-clause (/) of clause 7 of the Bill provides that every 
establishment shall establish an Internal Grievance Committee consisting of 
twelve Members, out of which one shall be a psychologist, to be nominated by the 
employer possessing such qualifications and experience and in such manner and 
with such salary or allowances and on such terms and conditions, as may be 
prescribed. Sub-clause (3) of clause 7 provides that if the finding of the Internal 
Grievance Committee is against the employer, then the employer shall be liable to 
a fine up to fifty thousand rupees, which shall be paid to the complainant. Clause 
10 of the Bill provides that the appropriate Government shall provide adequate 
funds for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible at this stage, to make an exact estimate of the expenditure likely to be 
involved. 


92 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 11 of the Bill empowers the Central Government and State 
Governments to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Bill. Clause 12 
empowers the Central Government to make such provisions through an order for 
removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Bill. 


As the rules and orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 93 


Bill No. XXVI of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes Short title and 
(Prevention of Atrocities) Amendment Act, 2025. pe ac ar 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Amendment of 2. In section 4 of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention 
Secon: of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for 33 of 1989. 
clause (1), the following shall be substituted, namely— 


“(1) Whoever, being a public servant, wilfully neglects his duties 
required to be performed by him under this Act,— 


(i) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
shall not be less than one year; 


(ii) in addition to the punishment specified under clause (i), 
such public servant shall be subject to departmental proceedings, in 
accordance with the applicable service rules; and 


(iii) where such public servant is found to have repeatedly 
failed in the discharge of such duties without reasonable cause, he 
may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, be dismissed from the service.” 


Amendment of 3. 1ा section 21 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (vii), the 
pecnonel following new clauses shall be inserted, namely,— 


“(viii) the conduct of regular training programs for law 
enforcement offices, judicial officers, and government officials to ensure 
they are well-versed with the provisions of this Act and sensitive to the 
issues faced by members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes; and 

(ix) the launching of public awareness campaigns to educate the 
general public about the rights and protections provided under this Act.” 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 95 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


As per ‘Crime in India 2022’, published by National Crime Records Bureau, a 
total of 57582 and 10064 crimes were registered against Scheduled Castes (SC) and 
Scheduled Tribes (ST) respectively, in the year 2022. Both of these numbers were an 
increase from what was registered in the previous year. In the same report, the number 
of victims reported under the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of 
Atrocities) Act, 1989 (PoA Act) alone, i.e., in cases not involving any provisions of the 
Indian Penal Code, for the year 2022, was 4713. 


In Lata Singh v. the State of UP (AIR 2006 SCC 2522), Supreme Court has 
said, “The caste system is a curse on the nation and the sooner it is destroyed the better. 
In fact, it is dividing the nation at a time when we have to be united to face the 
challenges before the nation unitedly.” 


In the case of Subhash Kashinath Mahajan v. The State of Maharashtra (AIR 
2018 SC 1498), the Supreme Court opined that SC/ST Prevention of Atrocities Act 
(i.e., the PoA Act) is being misused and checks are needed to prevent such misuse. The 
act had to be interpreted in a manner which will ensure that “casteism is not 
perpetuated” through the implementation of the law. The court also noted that the 
legislature never intended for innocent citizens to be termed as accused through this act. 
However, it noted that this Act has become an instrument to blackmail or to wreak 
personal vengeance which wasn’t the motive of the legislators while bringing forward 
the Act. This judgement was nullified through the insertion of Section 18A in the Act 
whose constitutionality was upheld in the case of Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. Union of 
India. However, observations as made above can’t be absolutely neglected. 


In P. Mariappan v. The Deputy Inspector General of Police, Coimbatore Range 
and Ors. (MANU/TN/0657/2014), the Madras HC directed the Superintendent of Police 
to register a case against the Inspector of Police under Section 4 of the PoA Act, 
because he had investigated into the complaint of the Petitioner himself, and had failed 
to put the files on record for the orders of the Superintendent of Police. The Court noted 
that this investigation could not have been done by the Inspector of Police, but had to be 
done by an officer not below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police as per Section 
7 of the PoA Act. The Court also held the State Government responsible for 
compensating the Petitioner, because the police officials of the State Government had 
passed an order to bar the Petitioner from entering the village altogether. 


Various studies and reports like that of National Dalit Movement for Justice 
Report, 2020, State of Policing in India Report (2018) by Common Cause and Lokniti- 
CSDS etc. indicate that biases against marginalised communities often influence how 
cases are handled. Many public servants also lack comprehensive knowledge of the 
Act, hence mandatory sensitivity training can play a key role in combating prejudices 
that may otherwise hinder the fair treatment. Regular training would create a culture of 
accountability, making it easier to identify and address failures in enforcement. This 
sort of training also aligns with Article 46 of the Constitution which directs the state to 
promote the educational and economic interests of SC/ST communities and protect 
them from social injustice and exploitation. 


Public servants often handle a high volume of cases, and negligence can 
sometimes stem from a lack of accountability. Increasing the minimum punishment 
from six months to one year emphasizes the gravity of neglect and signals that willful 
negligence will not be tolerated. Departmental proceedings can be initiated more 
promptly than criminal trials, providing an immediate accountability mechanism for 
dereliction of duty. When public servants know that departmental actions like 
suspension, demotion, or reprimand are possible, they are more likely to approach 
SC/ST cases with diligence and seriousness. 


Hence this Bill. 
MANOJ KUMAR JHA. 


96 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Xi 


BILL No. LV of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of Small Claims Courts across 
India to ensure speedy, cost-effective, and simplified resolution of 
minor civil disputes, and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Small Claims Court Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Establishment 
of Small 
Claims 
Courts. 


Composition 
and 
Appointment. 


SEC. 2] 


2. 


4. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 97 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) “High Court” means,— 


(i) in relation to any State, the High Court for that State; 


(ii) in relation to a Union territory to which the jurisdiction 
of the High Court for a State has been extended by law, that High 
Court; and 


(iii) in relation to any other Union territory, the highest 
Court of criminal appeal for that territory other than the Supreme 
Court of India. 


(c) “Judge” shall have the same meaning as defined under 
section 2 of the Judges (Protection) Act, 1985; 


(d) “party” means a person who files or defends a claim before 
the Small Claims Court; 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(f) “small claim” means a civil dispute, except those expressly 
excluded under the provisions of this Act, where the value of the claim 
does not exceed rupees two lakh: 


Provided that the Central Government, in consultation with the 
State Governments may, by notification in the Official Gazette, revise 
the monetary threshold, from time to time, based on inflation and 
regional cost-of-living indices. 


CHAPTER II 


INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK 


(1) The appropriate Government shall in consultation with the Chief 
Justice of the jurisdictional High Court, establish, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, one or more special courts to be known as the Small 
Claims Courts for such district or districts, or for any specified local 
area within a district under its territorial jurisdiction, taking into 
account the volume of cases, population density and the need for 
accessible dispute resolution, as may be considered necessary for the 
purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every Small Claims Court established under sub-section (/) shall 
exercise civil jurisdiction exercisable immediately before that day by all 
courts except the concerned High Court and the Supreme Court in relation 
to small claims, over such pecuniary and territorial limits as may be 
specified in the notification issued by the appropriate Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the jurisdictional High Court. 


(1) Every Small Claims Court established under section 3 shall be presided 
over by,— 


(a) a District Judge; or 


(b) any Judicial Officer not below the rank of Civil Judge 


59 of 1985. 


35 of 2019. 


26 of 1881 


98 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(Senior Division), as may be designated by the concerned High Court. 


and shall have such number of Judges as the appropriate Government 
may in consultation with the concerned High Court, prescribe. 


(2) The High Court shall supervise and allocate work and procedure to 
such Courts in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made in this 
regard by the appropriate Government. 


(1) The appropriate Government shall, in consultation with the 
concerned High Court, appoint an officer to be called the Registrar of 
the Small Claims Court and such number of other officers and staff 
to assist the Small Claims Court in the discharge of its functions under 
this Act and ensure the provision of necessary infrastructure, and 
other facilities to ensure the effective functioning of the Small Claims 
Courts. 


(2) The method of recruitment, the qualifications and experience, 
salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of the Registrar, officers and staff so appointed under sub- 
section (1) as well as the functions and duties to be performed by the 
Registrar shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force and subject to the provisions of this Act, the Small Claims Court 
shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate small claims arising within its 
territorial jurisdiction, including but not limited to the following matters, 
namely— 


(a) suits for recovery of money arising from written or oral 
contracts, loans, advances, unpaid dues, or security deposits; 


(b) disputes concerning title, possession, delivery, or wrongful 
detention of movable property; 


(c) claims for damages for breach of contract, negligence, or 
non-performance of obligations; 


(d) small-value consumer disputes which do not fall within the 
definition of a ‘consumer dispute’ under clause (8) of section 2 of the 
Consumer Protection Act, 2019; 


(e) disputes arising out of service agreements, warranty claims, 
or minor service deficiencies; 


(f) landlord—tenant disputes involving only recovery of rent, 
utilities, or other monetary dues not involving eviction or title; 


(g) compensation claims for lost or damaged goods, including 
parcels and deliveries; and 


(h) claims arising from dishonoured cheques under section 138 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, where only compensation is 
sought and not criminal prosecution. 


(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time 
being in force, the Small Claims Court shall not have jurisdiction to 
entertain, try, or decide the following matters, namely—— 


(a) suits involving determination of rights, title, or interest in 
immovable property, including disputes pertaining to tenancy, 
eviction, or possession; 


Registrar, 
officers, staff, 
infrastructure 
and other 
facilities. 


Jurisdiction of 
Small Claims 
Courts. 


Exclusion of 
jurisdiction. 


Procedures 
and powers of 
the Small 
Claims Court. 


Time limits 
for disposal 
of cases. 


Finality of 
orders and 
referral to 
mediation. 


Legal 
representation. 


SEC. 2] 


10. 


11. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 99 


(b) suits seeking permanent, mandatory, or prohibitory 
injunctions, or declaratory reliefs; 


(c) proceedings relating to succession, wills, inheritance, 
guardianship, maintenance, adoption, or any other family or 
matrimonial matter; and 


(d) matters which are pending before or fall within the exclusive 
jurisdiction of any tribunal, commission, or authority established 
under any law for the time being in force, including but not limited to 
the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Consumer Disputes Redressal 
Commissions, Labour Courts, Rent Tribunals, Debt Recovery 
Tribunals, and Tax Authorities. 


(2) The provisions of this section shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force. 


(1) The Small Claims Court shall follow a summary procedure to ensure 
speedy resolution of disputes: 


Provided that the procedure shall be simplified to accommodate parties 
without legal training. 


(2) The Small Claims Court shall have the power to regulate its own 
procedure consistent with the principles of natural justice and the provisions 
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, unless otherwise provided under this 
Act. 


(3) Proceedings of the Small Claims Court may be conducted in physical or 
digital mode, including online hearings, as may be deemed necessary. 


(1) Every case instituted before the Small Claims Court shall, as far as 
practicable, be disposed of within ninety days from the date of first hearing. 


(2) The Small Claims Court may, if it considers necessary, extend the period 
referred to in sub-section (7) by a maximum of thirty days for reasons to be 
recorded in writing. 


(1) The judgment or order passed by the Small Claims Court shall be final 
and binding on the parties and shall not be subject to appeal or revision in 
any court, except as otherwise provided under this Act. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), any party 
aggrieved by the outcome may, prior to the pronouncement of judgment or 
within such time as may be prescribed, seek resolution of the dispute 
through mediation in accordance with the provisions of the Mediation Act, 
2023. 


(3) The Small Claims Court may, at any stage of the proceedings and with 
the consent of the parties, refer the matter for mediation under Chapter IV 
of the Mediation Act, 2023, and shall take on record the settlement, if any, 
arrived at between the parties in accordance with section 20 of the said Act. 


(1) A party may appear in person or be represented by a duly authorised 
representative, who need not be a legal practitioner. 


(2) Legal practitioners may appear only with the leave of the Small Claims 


5 of 1908. 


32 of 2023. 


32 of 2023. 


100 


12. 


13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Court and with the consent of the opposite party. 


(1) The Small Claims Court may, at any stage of the proceedings or at the 
time of final adjudication, award such costs, compensation, or deterrent 
penalty as it deems just and equitable, having regard to the facts and 
circumstances of the case and in such manner and subject to such limits as 
may be prescribed. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), the Small 
Claims Court may — 


(a) award reasonable costs to the successful party towards 
expenses incurred in the proceedings; 


(b) direct payment of compensation to a party who has suffered 
undue hardship, harassment, or inconvenience due to the conduct of 
the opposing party; 


(c) impose a deterrent penalty against any party for instituting 
frivolous or vexatious claims, defences, or for abuse of the process of 
the Small Claims Court; 


(3) The Small Claims Court shall record brief reasons in writing for 
awarding such costs, compensation, or penalty, and shall have due regard 
to— 


(a) the conduct of the parties during the proceedings; 
(b) the nature and seriousness of the claim or defence; and 
(c) the need to discourage misuse of the judicial process. 


(4) Any sum awarded or imposed under this section shall be recoverable 
as if it were a decree of the civil court of competent jurisdiction, in a 
manner as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 


MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State 
Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature 


Award of costs, 
compensation, 
and deterrent 
penalty. 


Power to make 
rules. 


SEC. 2] 

Protection of 14. 
action taken in 
good faith. 
Power to 15. 
remove 
difficulties. 

Act not in 16. 


derogation of 
any other law. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 101 


consists of one House, before that House. 


No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer 
or employee acting under this Act in good faith. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may 
appear necessary for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 


102 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Indian judiciary is grappling with a massive pendency of civil cases, 
many of which involve low-value disputes that could be resolved through 
simplified adjudication. According to the National Judicial Data Grid (NJDG, 
2024), nearly 35per-cent. of all civil cases pending in subordinate courts relate to 
claims below two lakh rupees. These typically include disputes over money 
recovery, delayed payments, movable property, service deficiencies, or minor 
breaches of contract. However, the absence of a dedicated framework for handling 
such cases results in prolonged litigation, increased expenses, and inefficient 
utilisation of judicial resources. 


For the common citizen, especially from economically weaker or lower 
middle-income groups, access to justice in such matters is often hindered by 
procedural complexity, high legal fees, and lack of familiarity with the formal legal 
system. Many litigants choose to abandon their rightful claims due to the 
disproportionate effort and cost involved, resulting in a denial of justice. At the 
same time, civil courts remain overwhelmed with a high volume of small-value 
claims, contributing significantly to judicial delays. There is, therefore, a pressing 
need to create a special category of courts with limited jurisdiction, streamlined 
procedures, and cost-effective mechanisms that allow individuals to resolve minor 
disputes in a timely and affordable manner. 


The Small Claims Court Bill, 2025 aims to fill this gap by establishing 
Small Claims Courts at the district and sub-district levels, with jurisdiction limited 
to civil disputes up to two lakh rupees. The proposed courts will adjudicate specific 
types of disputes including money recovery, contractual defaults, claims for 
damages, delivery of movable property, and certain low-value consumer or 
tenancy-related matters. Matters involving title to immovable property, 
matrimonial or family issues, and cases under the exclusive jurisdiction of 
specialised tribunals have been expressly excluded to maintain simplicity and 
speed. 


The Bill empowers State Governments to establish these courts in 
consultation with the jurisdictional High Courts and provides for the appointment 
of judicial officers not below the rank of Civil Judge (Senior Division) to preside 
over them. The procedure will be summary in nature, with proceedings conducted 
physically or online, and decisions expected within ninety days. Parties can appear 
in person or be represented by authorised individuals, eliminating the requirement 
for legal representation unless permitted by the court and agreed to by both sides. 


To deter misuse of the process and safeguard genuine claimants, the Bill 
authorises courts to award reasonable costs, compensation, or deterrent penalties 
in appropriate cases. It also promotes alternate dispute resolution by allowing 
referral to mediation at any stage, in accordance with the Mediation Act, 2023. 


The objective of this Bill is to strengthen access to justice by making the 
legal system more responsive to everyday grievances. By providing an 
inexpensive, fast, and citizen friendly platform for resolving small disputes, the 
Small Claims Court Bill, 2025 will improve public confidence in the justice system, 
reduce the burden on civil courts, and promote a culture of timely legal redress. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SANJAY SETH. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 103 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 provides for the establishment of Small Claims Courts by the 
appropriate Government in such district or districts or for any specified local area 
within the district as may be considered necessary. Clause 5 empowers the 
appropriate Government, in consultation with the High Court, to appoint the 
Registrar, officers and staff to assist the Small Claims Court in the discharge of its 
functions under the Bill as well as to provide necessary infrastructure and other 
facilities for its effective functioning. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


104 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 13 empowers the Central and State Government, as the case may 
be, to make rules, to carry out the provisions of this Bill. Clause 15 provides that 
the Central Government may, make such order, as may be necessary, for removing 
any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules, or orders will relate to matters of procedural and administrative 
details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 105 


XIV 


BILL No. LXII of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the identification, free medical treatment, and financial 
assistance and support to persons suffering from rare and life-threatening diseases, 
for the establishment of a statutory Treatment of Rare and 
Life-threatening Diseases Fund and to provide 
for its governance structure, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows: — 


CHAPTERI 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Persons with Rare and Life-Threatening Short title and 
commencement. 


Diseases (Financial Support and Medical Entitlement) Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Classification of 
diseases. 


Medical 
entitlements of 
persons 
diagnosed with 
notified 
diseases. 


106 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) ‘appropriate Government’ means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central 
Government; 


(b) “Centre of Excellence” means any medical institution, 
hospital, or research centre as may be designated by the Central 
Government under section 9, for the treatment of rare and life- 
threatening diseases notified under section 3 ; 


(c) “Fund” means the Treatment of Rare and Life-Threatening 
Diseases Fund constituted under section 5; 


(d) “Life-Threatening Disease” means a disease which poses a 
substantial risk of mortality or irreversible long-term impairment, as 
may be notified by the Central Government under section 3; 


(e) “person” means any citizen of India diagnosed with a disease 
classified and notified under section 3; 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(g) “Rare Disease” means a disease notified as such by the 
Central Government under section 3. 


CHAPTER II 


CLASSIFICATION OF DISEASES 


(1) For the purposes of this Act, a disease may be classified into one of the 
following two categories, namely, — 


(a) Part A — Rare Diseases, as defined under clause (g) of section 
2; and. 


(b) Part B — Life-Threatening Diseases, as defined under clause 
(d) of section 2. 


(2) The Central Government shall, within one year of the commencement of 
this Act, having regard to the medical evidence, recommendations of 
medical experts and such other criteria as may be prescribed, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify from time to time the list of diseases falling 
under each Part under sub-section (7). . 


(3) The list of diseases so notified under sub-section (2) shall be reviewed 
and updated at such intervals and in such manner as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 


MEDICAL ENTITLEMENTS AND TREATMENT OBLIGATIONS 
(1) Every person diagnosed with a disease falling under Part A or Part 


B, as notified under section 3 shall, upon certification in this regard by 
such authority as may be prescribed, be entitled to,— 


(a) free diagnosis and treatment at such designated Centre 
of Excellence; 


(b) access to prescribed medication, assistive devices, gene or 
cell therapy, or surgical interventions, as deemed necessary by the 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


designated Centre of Excellence; 


(c) reimbursement or payment of transport allowance and 
attendant compensation for visits to hospitals located at a distance 
exceeding fifty kilometers from the place of ordinary residence in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed; 


(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that no person shall be 
denied treatment on the ground of financial incapacity. 


CHAPTER IV 


FUND AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE 


5. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, constitute a fund to be known as the Treatment of Rare and 
Life-threatening Diseases Fund, for the purposes of implementation of 
the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Fund shall be credited with,— 


(a) contributions in the form of voluntary grants or donations 
from individuals, institutions, corporations, multilateral agencies, in 
such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) budgetary allocations made by the Central Government 
from the Consolidated Fund of India, from time to time, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf; 


(c) contributions from the Members of Parliament Local Area 
Development Scheme (MPLADS), in such manner and subject to such 
norms, as may be prescribed; 


(d) budgetary allocations made by the State Government, from 
time to time after due appropriation made by the State Legislature by 
law in this behalf; and 


(e) contributions made by companies or corporate entities as part 
18 of 2013. of their Corporate Social Responsibility obligations under section 35 
of the Companies Act, 2013 and the relevant rules made thereunder, in 

such manner as may be prescribed. 


6. (1) The Fund shall be utilised for the following purposes, namely— 


(a) providing direct financing and provision of cashless 
treatment or financial treatment support at designated Centres of 
Excellence; 


(b) providing financial assistance for diagnostics, medications, 
and emergency medical care; 


(c) providing post-treatment rehabilitation, including home- 
based care, nutritional assistance and mobility support; and 


(d) strengthening capacity-building and __ infrastructure 
enhancement of designated Centres of Excellence. 


(2) The disbursement of the financial assistance under sub-section (/) shall 
be done through Direct Benefit Transfer to institutions or eligible families 
in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that persons diagnosed with the diseases notified under 


Constitution of 
the Treatment 
of Rare and 
Life-threatening 
Diseases Fund. 


Disbursement 
and utilisation. 


108 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


section 3 shall apply to the Nodal Officer appointed under section 10, in the 
prescribed format in such manner as may be prescribed for receiving 
financial assistance and support from the Fund under sub-section (/). 


Provided further that the financial assistance shall be disbursed only 
after processing and scrutiny of the applications in such manner and subject 
to fulfillment of eligibility conditions as may be prescribed. 


(3) The appropriate Government shall ensure transparency in the 
disbursement of funds through measures such as real-time public disclosure 
of disbursals on such public platform, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed and an independent annual audit by such agency, as may be 
notified by the Central Government. 


Administration 7. (1) The Fund shall be administered by a Governing Council constituted 
pie ands by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette. 


(2) The Governing Council shall consist of the following members, - 


(a) the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, Government of 
India— Chairperson ex-officio; 


(b) Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in the 
Government of India - Member ex-officio; 


(c) Secretary, Ministry of Finance in the Government of India - 
Member ex-officio; 


(d) three experts in medical science, each having at least fifteen 
years of experience in the treatment, research, or policy relating to rare 
or life-threatening diseases, to be nominated by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed - Members; 


(e) one representative from a nationally recognised patient 
advocacy organisation, to be nominated by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed — Members. 


(3) The Governing Council shall discharge the following functions, namely — 


(a) approve and oversee the disbursement of funds under this 
Act, ensuring equitable and need-based allocation; 


(b) frame, review, and revise operational, procedural, and 
eligibility guidelines for the utilisation and disbursement of the Fund, 
including timelines for processing of applications in this behalf; 


(c) establish, regulate, and supervise mechanisms for emergency 
disbursement of financial assistance in urgent cases, as may be 
prescribed; 


(d) recommend to the Central Government periodic revisions of 
financial limits, categories of eligible diseases, and income criteria, in 
accordance with medical advancements, inflation, and policy 
priorities; 

(e) monitor and evaluate the impact and effectiveness of financial 
assistance provided under this Act, through annual reports, data 
analysis, and outcome tracking; 


(f) promote collaboration with research institutions, charitable 
organisations, and private stakeholders for resource mobilisation, 
technical support, and innovation in treatment strategies; 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(g) ensure that grievance redressal mechanisms are accessible 
and effective for persons aggrieved by fund disbursal decisions or 
delays; 


(h) recommend measures to improve awareness and accessibility 
of schemes and benefits provided under this Act, particularly among 
economically weaker and socially disadvantaged sections; 


(i) review compliance with audit, transparency, and reporting 
requirements relating to the Fund; and 


(0) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the 
Central Government to ensure the effective implementation of this Act. 


(4) The term of office of, the salaries and allowances payable to and 
other service conditions of the Members of the Governing Council other 
than the ex-officio Members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Central Government shall appoint such number of officers and 
staff to the Governing Council to assist it in the efficient discharge of its 
functions under the Act. 


(6) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of service of the officers and staff so 
appointed under sub-section (5) shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Governing Council shall prepare and publish within such period of 
time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government, an annual statement of accounts of the Fund and forward the 
same to the Central Government, which shall cause it to be laid before both 
Houses of Parliament. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law on this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Governing Council for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


CHAPTER V 
IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING 


(1) The Central Government shall designate Centres of Excellence for 
diagnosis, treatment, and training in the field of diseases notified under 
section 3. 


(2) The Centres of Excellence, as designated under sub section (J), shall 
carry out the following functions, - 


(a) provide timely, accessible, and standardised medical care in 
accordance with the clinical protocols and treatment guidelines 
prescribed under this Act or as notified by the Central Government; 


(b) maintain detailed and accurate patient records, including 
treatment outcomes, and submit periodic reports to such authority of 
the Central Government as may be prescribed; 


(c) undertake regular community outreach, public awareness 
campaigns, and professional capacity-building programmes, 
including training of healthcare personnel, to promote early diagnosis, 
treatment adherence, and social inclusion of affected persons; and 


(d) such other functions as the Central Government may assign 
to them, time to time. 


109 


Central 


Government to 


provide funds 


Centres 
Excellence. 


of 


110 


Compliance and 
monitoring. 


Annual report. 


Grievance 
redressal. 


Power to make 
tules. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(1) The appropriate Government shall appoint an officer of appropriate rank 
and experience, as may be prescribed, to be the Nodal Officer for 
implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Nodal Officer shall be responsible for: 
(a) identification and registration of eligible persons; 


(b) coordination with Centres of Excellence and Central 
authorities; and 


(c) timely submission of fund applications and status updates. 


(3) The Central Government shall establish and maintain a national 
web-based platform to, — 


(a) track diagnosis, treatment, and fund disbursement; and 


(b) generate outcome metrics and public transparency 
reports. 


The Central Government shall prepare, in such form and manner and at such 
time of each financial year as may be prescribed, an annual report on the 
status of implementation of this Act, including therein details of 
beneficiaries, medical and financial assistance rendered, fund 
disbursements, compliance by concerned authorities, and other information, 
as may be prescribed and cause it to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


CHAPTER VI 


MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the official Gazette, 
designate an authority or officer of appropriate rank, as may be prescribed, 
in each district as the District Grievance Redressal Authority, for the 
purposes of receiving, inquiring into, and redressing grievances arising out 
of the implementation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The manner of filing of grievances, the procedure to be followed by the 
District Grievance Redressal Authority under sub-section (/), shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
the Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(3) Every rule made by the State Government or the Union territory 
Government with Legislature, as the case may be, under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State 
Legislature or the Union territory Legislature, where it consists of two 
Houses, or where such legislature consists of one House, before that House. 


SEC. 2] 


14. 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


No suit, prosecution, or legal proceeding shall lie against any person or 
authority acting in good faith under this Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force and, in case of any 
inconsistency, the provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect on the 
provisions of any such law to the extent of the inconsistency. 


If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 


Provided that no such orders shall be made after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


(2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament. 


111 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Act not in 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


112 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Rare and life-threatening diseases, though affecting a small fraction 
of the population individually, collectively impact millions of lives across 
India. According to the National Policy for Rare Diseases, 2021, over 7,000 
rare diseases have been documented worldwide, with nearly 450 diseases 
reported in India alone. However, access to affordable and timely diagnosis, 
and treatment remains an enormous challenge. The exorbitant cost of 
therapies—often ranging from rupees ten lakh to rupees two crore annually per 
patient—places life-saving treatment out of reach for most families, especially 
those from economically weaker sections. 


The Persons with Rare and Life-Threatening Diseases (Financial 
Support and Medical Entitlement), Bill, 2025 seeks to establish a structured, 
rights-based framework to ensure free treatment, and financial support for 
persons affected by such conditions. This includes the creation of a Treatment 
of Rare and Life-Threatening Diseases Fund with contributions from the 
Central Government, State Governments, private donors, Members of 
Parliament, and other sources. This institutional mechanism will streamline 
fund disbursement through Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT), enhance 
transparency, and reduce bureaucratic delays in life-saving interventions. 


Children are the worst affected by rare and genetic disorders, which 
often lead to developmental delays, disability, and early mortality. This Bill 
mandates no denial of treatment to any child based on financial incapacity, 
upholding Article 21 of the Constitution and India’s obligations under the 
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child. Furthermore, the Bill 
ensures access to inclusive education, rehabilitation, and support services 
under existing laws like the Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 
2009. 


Given the lack of a single statutory body to oversee rare and life- 
threatening diseases, this Bill proposes a Governing Council and designated 
Centres of Excellence to provide quality care and monitor treatment outcomes. 
With technological tools like a national online registry and a grievance 
redressal mechanism, this Bill aims to ensure accountability, patient dignity, 
and effective public health response. In light of India’s growing genetic and 
metabolic disease burden, this legislation is both urgent and necessary to 
provide equitable health justice and a safety net to vulnerable families across 
the country. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SANJAY SETH. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 113 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the medical entitlements of persons 
diagnosed with rare and life-threatening diseases, including access to free 
diagnosis and treatment, access to medicines, assistive devices, gene or cell 
therapy and surgical interventions at designated Centres of Excellence as well 
as transport allowance and attendant compensation for hospital visits exceeding 
fifty kilometers from the usual place of residence. Clause 5 provides for the 
constitution of the Treatment of Rare and Life-threatening Diseases Fund to be 
utilised for financing the treatment of rare and life-threatening diseases, post- 
treatment rehabilitation, capacity building and infrastructure enhancement of 
the designated Centres of Excellence and for budgetary allocation by the 
Central Government from the Consolidated Fund of India thereto. Clause 7 
provides for the constitution of a Governing Council to administer the Fund, 
the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service 
of Members other than ex-officio Members of the Governing Council. The 
clause also provides that the Central Government shall appoint such number of 
officer and staff to assist the Governing Council in the discharge of its functions 
and for the salary and allowances payable to them as well as their other terms 
and conditions of service. Clause 8 empowers the Central Government to 
provide adequate funds to the Governing Council. Sub-clause (3) of clause 10 
provides for the establishment and maintenance of a national web-based 
platform to track diagnosis, treatment and fund disbursement. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this 
juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


114 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 13 empowers the appropriate Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Act. Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make such provisions through an order for removing 
any difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


23 of 2010. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 115 


XV 


Bill No. LIV of 2025 


A Bill to amend the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 
2010. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 


India as follows: — 


1. 


(1) This Act may be called the Clinical Establishments (Registration and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


In section 1 of the Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) 
Act, 2010 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), after the proviso to 
sub-section (3), the following new proviso shall be inserted, namely: — 


“Provided further that the Central Government may incentivise 
the adoption and implementation of this Act in non-participating States 
through financial grants, capacity-building assistance, digitisation 
infrastructure, and other technical support.” 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 1. 


116 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Amendment of 3. Insection 2 of the principal Act, — 


section 2. 
(i) after clause (c), the following new clause shall be inserted, 


namely: — 


“(cc) “Committee” means the District Grievance Redressal 
Committee established under section 43E;”; 


(ii) after clause (d), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“(dd) “minimum standards” means the mandatory standards 
as notified under this Act relating to, inter alia, infrastructure 
requirements, human resource qualifications and _ ratios, 
availability of medical equipment, infection prevention and 
control measures, maintenance of electronic health record, 
patient care protocols, and grievance redressal mechanisms, to be 
specified for each category of clinical establishment by the 
Central Government in consultation with the National Council;”; 


(iii) after clause (f), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“(ff) “patient” means any individual, whether inpatient or 
outpatient, who is registered with or seeks to receive 
consultation, diagnosis, examination, treatment, admission, 
surgery, or follow-up care at a clinical establishment;”; and 


(iv) for clause (०), the following shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(o) “to stabilise or stabilisation” means the provision of 
urgent and appropriate medical treatment required to prevent the 
worsening of a patient’s emergency medical condition, and to 
facilitate either the safe discharge or medically supervised 
transfer of the patient to another facility, as per clinical protocols 
notified by the Central Government in consultation with the 
National Medical Commission or such other authority as may be 


designated by it.”. 
Amendment of 4. In section 10 of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), for clause (c), the 
section 10. following shall be substituted, namely: — 


“(c) three members, each fulfilling the following criteria, to be 
nominated by the State Government on such terms and conditions as 
may be prescribed: — 


(i) one elected representative from a local self-government 
institution, who has held elected office for a minimum of three 
years and has demonstrable engagement in the health, sanitation, 
or public welfare sectors; 


(ii) one representative of a civil society organisation, 
registered for not less than five years and having demonstrable 
work experience in patient rights, public health advocacy, or 
social accountability in healthcare delivery; and 


(iii) one medical practitioner registered with the respective 
State Medical Council, possessing a recognised MBBS or 
equivalent degree, and a minimum of seven years of clinical 
experience, who shall not own or operate a clinical establishment 
subject to registration under this Act.” 


Amendment of 5. In Section 12 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7) — 


section 12. 
(i) after clause (iii), the following new clause shall be inserted, 


namely: — 


“(iia) prominently display, at the entrance or in the public 
waiting area, the Charter of Patients’ Rights as may be notified 


SEC. 2] 


6. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 117 


by the Central Government, in the official language of the State 
and in English, and in a format that is accessible to persons with 
disabilities;”; and 


(ii) after clause (iv), the following proviso shall be inserted, 
namely: — 


“Provided that every clinical establishment shall, at the time 
of registration and renewal, be classified under one of the four 
categories specified in section 13 and such classification shall 
determine the extent of compliance required with respect to 
standards, documentation, registration fee, and frequency of 
inspections, in such manner as may be prescribed.”. 


After section 12 of the principal Act, the following new section shall be 
inserted, namely: — 


“124. (1) Every clinical establishment shall mandatorily register 
on the Health Facility Registry maintained under the Ayushman 
Bharat Digital Mission and obtain a Unique Health Facility Identifier. 


(2) Every clinical establishment shall maintain electronic health 
records and ensure real-time, secure, and interoperable data sharing 
with the national health information architecture as per the standards 
and protocols as may be prescribed by the Central Government.” 


In section 13 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following shall be 
substituted, namely: — 


“(1) Clinical establishment of different systems shall be 
classified and notified by the Central Government into the following 
categories for the purpose of proportionate registration, regulation, 
compliance and inspection: — 


(i) Category A — Multi-speciality hospitals with more than 
one hundred inpatient beds; 


(ii) Category B — Medium hospitals and nursing homes with 
thirty to one hundred beds; 


(iii) Category C — Small clinics, maternity homes, or 
nursing homes with up to twenty-nine beds; 


(iv) Category D — Standalone diagnostic centres, imaging 
laboratories, and single-speciality outpatient clinics: 


Provided that the Central Government may, from time to time, 
prescribe such new categories or make changes in the categories 
above, as may be required.” 


In section 24, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:- 


“Provided that such application shall also be accompanied by 
documentary proof of registration on the Ayushman Bharat Digital 
Mission platform and the corresponding Unique Health Facility 
Identifier and a self-declared statement of compliance with digital 
health standards and minimum requirements for infrastructure, 
personnel, and record-keeping, as applicable to the category of the 
establishment.” 


In section 33 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following new 
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:- 


“(1A) The authority in exercise of the powers conferred under 
sub-section (/)shall conduct an inspection of every registered clinical 
establishment at least once in every two years and the report of such 


Insertion of 
new section 
12A. 


Integration with 
the Ayushman 
Bharat Digital 
Mission. 


Amendment of 
section 13. 


Amendment 
of section 24. 


Amendment 
of section 33. 


118 


Amendment of 10. 
section 39. 

Insertion of new 11. 
Chapter VA. 


Constitution of 
District 
Grievance 
Redressal 
Committees 
(DGRCs). 


Jurisdiction and 
powers of the 
Committee. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


inspection shall be finalised and uploaded on the official website of the 
State Council within ninety days from the date of inspection, in a 
format accessible to the public.” 


For section 39 of the principal Act, the following shall be substituted, 
namely: — 


“39. The Central Government shall maintain in digital format an 
All India Register to be called as the National Register of clinical 
establishments that shall be an amalgam of the State Register of 
clinical establishments maintained by the State Governments and shall 
cause the same to be published in digital format on an online portal 
providing public access thereto: 


Provided that such portal shall enable users to conduct category- 
wise, location-wise, and service-specific searches, and download 
updated information relating to the registration and compliance data of 
all registered clinical establishments in the country.” 


After section 46 of the principal Act, the following new Chapter VA 
containing new sections 43A to 43E shall be inserted, namely: — 


CHAPTER VA 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM 


“43A. (1) Every State Government shall establish a District 
Grievance Redressal Committee in each revenue district, which shall 
consist of — 


(a) a retired District Judge or a retired senior civil service 
officer — Chairperson; 


(b) a nominee of the State Health Department, to be 
nominated by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member; 


(c) a representative from a registered civil society 
organisation with domain experience in healthcare, to be 
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member; 


(d) a representative from a registered civil society, to be 
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed - Member; and 


(e) a medical expert possessing not less than fifteen years of 
professional experience and reputation for clinical ethics, to be 
appointed by the State Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member. 


(2) Any person may file a written complaint against a registered 
clinical establishment for contravention of the provisions of this Act 
before the Committee in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


43B. The Committee shall have the jurisdiction to receive, 
inquire into, and adjudicate complaints pertaining to — 


(i) denial of emergency medical treatment or stabilization in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act; 


(ii) overcharging or non-transparency in billing; 
(iii) medical negligence; 


(iv) refusal to discharge patients or release medical 
documents without valid reason; 


(v) violation of the Charter of Patients’ Rights; and 


(vi) any other breach of the provisions of this Act. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 119 


43C. The Committee, shall upon inquiry into a complaint and 
after giving the concerned clinical establishment a _ reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, issue written orders including, but not 
limited to — 


(i) refund of unauthorised charges; 
(ii) imposition of warnings or compliance directions; 


(iii) recommendation for disciplinary action against guilty 
persons; and 


(iv) recommendation for prosecution or imposition of 
penalty under section 42 of the Act. 


43D. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Committee 
prefer an appeal to the State Council of Clinical Establishments within 
a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of such order, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The decision of the State Council shall be final and binding, 
and shall not be called in question in any court except by way of a 
petition under article 226 or 32 of the Constitution before the High 
Court having jurisdiction or the Supreme Court, as the case may be. 


43E. (J) Every State Government shall, after due appropriation 
made by the State Legislature by law in this behalf, allocate a separate 
budgetary head for the constitution, functioning, and administrative 
maintenance of the Committee in that State. 


(2) Each Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such 
form as may be prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General of India. 


(3) The accounts of the Committee, as audited and certified by 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person 
appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, 
shall be forwarded annually by the Committee to the State 
Government, which shall cause the same to be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is received, before the Legislature of that State, where it 
consists of one House, or where it consists of two Houses, before both 
Houses of the Legislature. 


43F. (1) Each Committee shall submit an annual report 
containing data on complaints received, disposed of, pending, and 
actions taken, to the State Health Department, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed, which shall publish the same on its 
website in such manner so as to facilitate easy public access. 


(2) The State Government shall cause the report under sub- 
section (1), as soon as may be after it is received, to be laid before the 
Legislature of that State, where it consists of one House, or where it 
consists of two House, before both Houses of the Legislature.” 


Reliefs and 
directions. 


Appeal 
mechanism. 


Funding, 
Accounts and 
Audit. 


Annual Report. 


120 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Clinical Establishments (Registration and Regulation) Act, 2010 was 
enacted to provide a framework for mandatory registration of clinical 
establishments and to prescribe minimum standards for their functioning. However, 
over a decade later, several deficiencies persist in its implementation, especially 
with respect to standardisation, digital compliance, enforcement, and grievance 
redressal. In India, private health facilities largely remain unregistered under the 
Act, particularly in non-participating states, leading to regulatory fragmentation 
and unmonitored healthcare practices. 


In light of rapid growth in private healthcare, rising patient grievances, and 
the digital transformation under the Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission (ABDM), 
this Amendment Bill seeks to strengthen the principal Act by introducing 
categorisation of clinical establishments, digital registration mandates, and real- 
time integration with ABDM's Health Facility Registry. Further, it seeks to define 
and enforce minimum standards for infrastructure, personnel, infection control, and 
patient rights compliance tailored to the scale and function of each facility, 
ensuring proportionate regulation for both small clinics and large hospitals. 


One of the persistent challenges in healthcare delivery is lack of 
transparency and accountability. Patients frequently face issues of overcharging, 
denial of emergency services, and inadequate care standards. The Bill proposes the 
constitution of District Grievance Redressal Committees (DGRCs) to provide 
timely, decentralised adjudication of patient complaints, with representation from 
legal, medical, and civil society domains. These Committees are empowered to 
recommend disciplinary action and refunds, ensuring an institutional mechanism 
for accountability and trust-building in healthcare. 


Additionally, the Bill proposes public disclosure of inspection reports and a 
searchable national register, enabling citizens to make informed choices. With 
India’s healthcare ecosystem increasingly dependent on private clinical 
establishments, there is an urgent need for a uniform, enforceable, and tech-enabled 
regulatory regime. This Amendment Bill responds to that need by aligning the Act 
with digital health reforms, promoting patient-centric governance, and empowering 
state authorities with tools for effective compliance monitoring and redressal. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SANJAY SETH. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 121 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 2 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may incentivise 
the adoption and implementation of this Act in non-participating States through 
financial grants, capacity-building assistance, digitisation infrastructure, and other 
technical support. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both recurring and non- 
recurring expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is not 
possible to estimate the exact quantum of recurring and non-recurring expenditure 
likely to be involved at this stage. 


122 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


XVI 


BILL No. LXVI of 2025 


A Bill to provide for mandatory insurance and compensation for death or 
disability of farmers and agricultural workers caused during agricultural 
activities, leveraging digital tools, safety incentives, and public-private 
partnerships, and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Kisan Jeevan Suraksha evam Durghatna 
Pratipurti Adhiniyam, 2025. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 123 


Definitions. 2. Inthis Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 


(a) “agricultural accident” means any sudden, unforeseen event 
caused due to external, violent, machinery-related, or chemical 
exposure or any other cause, as may be specified from time to time by 
the Authority, during agricultural work resulting in death of or 
physical injury to a farmer; 


(b) “agricultural activity” means sowing, harvesting, irrigation, 
use of agricultural machinery, pesticide spraying, handling of 
animals, transport of produce, borewell/boring related activities, and 
such other allied activities directly related to farming or cultivation, 
as may be prescribed; 


(c) “Authority” means the National Agricultural Risk Insurance 
Authority established under section 3; 


(d) “farmer” means any person engaged in agricultural activities, 
including agricultural labourers, tenant farmers, sharecroppers, and 
unregistered workers engaged in the agricultural sector or agricultural 
activities and such other category of persons as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify; 


(e)‘Fund” means the National Farming Risk Insurance Fund 
established under section 8; 


(f) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(g) “Scheme” means the National Farming Risk Insurance 
Scheme framed and notified under section 6. 


CHAPTER II 


NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL RISK INSURANCE AUTHORITY 


Establishment of 3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
the National Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the National 
Agricultural Risk 


Agricultural Risk Insurance Authority to exercise the powers conferred 


शिवा on, and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


Authority. 
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession 
and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, 
and to sue or be sued. 


(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi. 


(4) The Authority may establish regional and state-level offices in 
consultation with the respective State Governments, at such other 
places as deemed necessary. 


Composition of 4. (1) The Authority shall consist of: 
the Authority. 
(a) a person having at least twenty five years of experience in 


public health, agriculture, or insurance, to be appointed by the 
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — 
Chairperson; 


(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare — Member ex-officio; 


(c) the Secretary, to the Government of India in the 
Department of Financial Services — Member ex-officio; 


(d) the Chairperson of the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India — Member ex-officio; 


124 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(e) one representative from a public sector general insurance 
company, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed — Member; 


(9 two representatives of farmers, from different agro- 
climatic zones, to be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed, out of which one shall be a 
woman — Members; 


(g) two representatives of the State Governments, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed, out of which one shall be from a climate-vulnerable 
district — Members; 


(h) one expert in the field of occupational safety and health, to 
be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may 
be prescribed — Member; 


(i) one representative of agricultural cooperatives, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member; and 


(6) one representative of organisations or associations of the 
Indian diaspora with expertise in insurance or agriculture, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member. 


(2) The Central Government shall ensure gender, regional, and sectoral 
diversity in the composition of the Authority. 


(3) The Central Government shall, from time to time, appoint such 
number of officers and staff to the Authority, as may be required to 
assist it in its efficient functioning, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and Members of the Authority 
other than the ex-officio Members as well as the salary and allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


The Authority shall, perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely,— 


(a) administer the National Farming Risk Insurance Scheme 
framed under section 6 for the purpose of providing mandatory 
insurance and compensation in the case of death or disability from 
agricultural accidents to farmers, while carrying out agricultural 
activities; 


(b) establish and maintain a National Digital Registry of 
farmers, in such manner as may be prescribed, by integrating 
records and data of the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Samman Nidhi 
scheme and the records of the State Governments; 


(c) collaborate with public and private insurers to design 
affordable, risk-based insurance products; 


(d) develop and deploy on their website, a blockchain-based 
Public Dashboard for real-time tracking of insurance coverage, 
claims, and payouts, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(e) conduct awareness campaigns via mobile apps, Kisan Bima 
Pathshalas, cooperatives and such other means, as may be 
deemed fit, to achieve the target of eighty per cent. farmer 
outreach by the year 2027; 


3 


Functions of the 
Authority. 


National Farming 
Risk Insurance 
Scheme. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 125 


() formulate and conduct safety training programs for 
farmers to minimize agricultural accidents and issue certificates 
to farmers on successful completion of such programs, in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed, which will entitle them 
to discounts in insurance premium, as prescribed; 


(g) monitor claims processing, ensuring ninety per cent. 
disbursement within forty-five days of filing of claim; 


(h) recommend policy changes for ensuring better safety of 
farmers based on the National Agricultural Injury Database, to be 
maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(i) coordinate with Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, Pradhan 
Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana, and other related schemes of State 
Governments for synergy; 


(i) facilitate diaspora-sponsored funding and expertise for 
Scheme sustainability, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed; and 


(k) such other functions as may be required for implementing the 
provisions of this Act or as assigned to it by the Central Government, 
from time to time. 


CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL FARMING RISK INSURANCE SCHEME 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the official 
Gazette, frame an insurance scheme to be called the National Farming 
Risk Insurance Scheme for the purpose of providing mandatory 
insurance and compensation to farmers in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every farmer shall be mandatorily covered under the Scheme, unless 
such farmer opts out therefrom in writing in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed. 


(3) The insurance benefits under the Scheme shall include, but not be 
limited to, — 


(a) an amount of twenty-five lakh rupees in the event of death due 
to an agricultural accident; 


(b) an amount not exceeding ten lakh rupees in the event of 
permanent disability, based on an assessment and certification by the 
prescribed medical board; and 


(c) an amount not less than one lakh rupees and not exceeding two 
lakh rupees in the event of partial disability, based on severity. 


(4) The Central Government and the State Governments shall have 
concurrent liability for payment of premiums for the Scheme in the 
following ratio, namely— 


(a) sixty per cent. by the Central Government; and 
(b) forty per cent. by the State Governments. 


(5) The premiums shall be risk-based, with discounts upto twenty per cent. 
for farmers who have been issued certificates on successful completion of 
safety training programs, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(6) The coverage under the Scheme shall be integrated with Pradhan Mantri 
Kisan Samman Nidhi scheme for automatic enrollment, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


126 


10. 


11. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(1) Every claim under the Scheme shall be filed within one hundred and 
twenty days of the occurrence of the agricultural accident through such 
mobile applications, local nodal officer, or cooperative society and in such 
form and manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Authority established under section 3 of this Act shall cause every 
claim filed under sub-section (/) to be verified and processed within forty- 
five days, and if found to be admissible, not less than ninety per cent. of the 
insurance amount shall be disbursed electronically to the farmer’s bank 
account or to his nominee, as the case may be. 


(3) Any dispute relating to the disbursement of a claim shall be placed 
before a Grievance Redressal Committee constituted by the Authority with 
such composition and in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Grievance Redressal Committee shall include farmer 
and women representatives and shall resolve disputes within thirty days of 
reference of the same to it. 


(4) The Authority shall conduct random audits through such independent 
agency as may be prescribed, to ensure transparency. 


CHAPTER IV 
GOVERNANCE AND FINANCE 


(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
established for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called as the 
National Farming Risk Insurance Fund. 


(2) The Fund shall be administered by the Authority under the 
supervision and control of the Central Government and there shall be 
credited thereto: — 


(a) any sums of money paid by the Central and State 
Governments as premiums under sub-section (4) of section 6; 


(b) any sums provided by the Central Government to carry 
out the purposes of this Act; 


(c) grants, donations and other contributions including 
diaspora-sponsored funds approved by the Central Government; 
and 


(d) such other sums as may be specified from time to time. 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Authority, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


(1) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause 
to be laid before each House of Parliament, the annual report along with a 


Claim process 
under the 
Scheme. 


National Farming 
Risk Insurance 
Fund. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual report. 


SEC. 2] 


Power to make 
rules. 


12. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


13. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


14. 


Act not in 15. 
derogation and 
to supplement 


other laws. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 127 


memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendations of the Authority and the reasons, if any, for non- 
acceptance of the recommendations made therein. 


(3) Where the report or any of part thereof relates to any matter with 
which any State Government is concerned, the Authority shall forward a 
copy of such report or part thereof to the concerned State Government, 
who shall in turn, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause it to be laid 
before each House of State Legislature , where it consists of two Houses, or 
where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House, along with 
an explanatory memorandum on the action taken or proposed to be taken 
on the recommendation(s) related to the State, and reasons, if any, for not 
accepting any of the recommendation(s) made therein. 


CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


No suit or prosecution shall lie against the Authority or its members for 
actions taken in good faith. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing such difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being in force dealing with the subject matter of 
this Act. 


128 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Agriculture remains the primary occupation for nearly forty-six per cent. of 
India’s population, yet it continues to be one of the most hazardous professions in 
the country. Every year, it is estimated that between ten thousand to fifteen 
thousand fatalities and tens of thousands of non-fatal injuries occur during the 
performance of agricultural activities, including manual harvesting, pesticide 
spraying, operation of heavy machinery, working with animals, and exposure to 
environmental risks such as extreme heat or flooding. These agricultural accidents 
not only result in tragic loss of human lives but also often plunge already 
vulnerable rural families into cycles of poverty, indebtedness, and social insecurity. 


Despite the existence of government initiatives such as the Pradhan Mantri 
Fasal Bima Yojana (PMFBY) and Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana 
(PMSBY), these schemes either focus on crop loss or provide minimal generic 
accident coverage and do not adequately address occupational risks unique to 
farming. Moreover, participation in these schemes is largely voluntary and suffers 
from lack of awareness, access, and affordability, particularly for small and 
marginal farmers. The absence of a dedicated institutional mechanism for 
compensating agricultural injuries and fatalities constitutes a glaring gap in India's 
rural social protection architecture. 


This Bill seeks to address that gap by establishing a National Agricultural 
Risk Insurance Authority (NARIA), which is a statutory, autonomous body tasked 
with designing, implementing, and overseeing a comprehensive, affordable, and 
mandatory accident insurance scheme for farmers and agricultural workers. The 
scheme proposed under this legislation ensures compensation of: twenty five lakh 
rupees in the event of death, ten lakh rupees for permanent disability, and one-two 
lakh rupees for partial disability, to the affected individual or their nominated 
family member. The Bill mandates universal coverage for all registered agricultural 
workers and farmers, with the premium subsidized jointly by the Central 
Government (sixty per cent.) and State Governments (forty per cent.). Premium 
waivers may also be extended to small and marginal farmers, women-headed 
households, and those in climate-vulnerable regions. To ensure transparency, 
credibility, and timely compensation, the Authority shall deploy digital governance 
tools, including geo-tagged registration, blockchain-based verification, and a real- 
time claims management dashboard accessible via mobile devices. In addition, the 
Authority shall institutionalize farmer safety education, first-aid training, and risk 
awareness programs, and may collaborate with diaspora experts in agricultural 
technology and occupational health. 


The Bill aligns with the vision of Doubling Farmers’ Income, one of the 
objectives of Atmanirbhar Bharat, and the constitutional mandates under Articles 
21, 41, and 47. It also supports India’s commitment to the Sustainable 
Development Goals, particularly SDG 1 (No Poverty), SDG 3 (Good Health and 
Well-being), and SDG 8 (Decent Work and Economic Growth). Above all, the 
legislation aims to embed social justice, human dignity, and financial security into 
the heart of Indian agriculture, ensuring that the risk of farming is not borne solely 
by the farmer, but collectively mitigated by the State and society. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SATNAM SINGH SANDHU. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 129 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National 
Agricultural Risk Insurance Authority, while clause 4 provides for its composition 
and for the appointment of officers and staff thereto to assist it in the efficient 
discharge of its functions as well as for the salaries, allowances and service 
conditions of the Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the Authority. Clause 
5 sets out the functions of the Authority, including, inter alia, the establishment 
and maintenance of a National Digital Registry of farmers; development and 
deployment of Public Dashboard for real-time tracking of insurance coverage, 
claims and payouts; conduct of awareness campaigns and safety training programs 
for farmers. Clause 6 provides for the framing and notification of the National 
Farming Risk Insurance Scheme and sub-clause (4) thereof provides for concurrent 
liability of the Central and State Governments for payment of premiums for the 
Scheme. Clause 8 provides for the establishment of the National Farming Risk 
Insurance Fund for carrying out the purposes of this Bill and the amounts to be 
credited thereto including the manner thereof. Clause 9 of the Bill provides that 
the Central Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority for carrying 
out the purposes of this Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, 
though the exact expenditure cannot be determined, it is estimated that the non- 
recurring expenditure on infrastructure, digital platforms and training would 
amount to rupees three hundred crore, while the recurring expenditure on salaries, 
allowances, maintenance of digital systems, and premium liabilities under the 
Scheme would amount to rupees three thousand crore per annum. 


130 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central 
Government to make such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty 
that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedural and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 131 


XVII 


Bill No. LXIX of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a statutory authority to mobilize 
the skills, talents, and resources of the Indian diaspora for 
national development, fostering knowledge transfer, 
investment, and innovation, and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Pravasi Bharatiya Kaushal evam Pratibha Short title and 
Prerak Adhiniyam, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Establishment of 
the Indian 
Diaspora Skills 
and Talent 
Authority. 


Composition of 
the Authority. 


132 


2. 


4. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Authority” means the Indian Diaspora Skills and Talent 
Authority established under section 3; 


(b) “Committee” means the Monitoring and Evaluation Committee 
to be set up by the Authority under section 11; 


(c) “Indian diaspora” or “diaspora” means Non-Resident Indians 
(NRIs), Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs), and Overseas Citizens of 
India (OCIs) residing abroad; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) “Public-Private Partnership” means collaboration between the 
Authority and private entities for diaspora engagement; 


(f) “skill mapping” means evaluation of the presence of skills, 
knowledge and key qualifications as well as domain expertise for 
different sectors; and 


(g) “skill mobilisation” means the engagement of diaspora 
expertise for knowledge transfer, investment, mentorship, and 
innovation. 


CHAPTER II 
THE INDIAN DIASPORA SKILLS AND TALENT AUTHORITY 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the Indian Diaspora 
Skills and Talent Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said 
name sue or be sued. 


(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi. 
(1) The Authority shall consist of the following Members — 


(a) a person having at least twenty-five years of experience in 
the field of public administration, diaspora engagement, or 
industry, to be appointed by the President of India by warrant 
under his hand and seal in consultation with the Central 
Government as Chairperson; 


(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry 
of External Affairs — Member ex-officio; 


(c) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship — Member ex-officio; 


(d) one eminent person, belonging to the Indian diaspora, who 
is also a member of a global professional network, to be nominated 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed 
— Member; 


(e) two representatives from Indian industry associations such 
as the Confederation of Indian Industry or the Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, to be nominated by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed 
— Members; 


22 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(9 one member having requisite expertise in the field of data 
science and digital platforms, to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Member; 


(g) one woman, belonging to the Indian diaspora with 
requisite expertise in the field of academia or technology, to be 
appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may be 
prescribed — Member; 


(h) one person representing an Indian diaspora welfare 
organization, to be nominated by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed — Member; and 


(i) one person, below forty years of age, representing young 
Indian diaspora professionals, to be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner as may be prescribed — Member. 


Provided that Members other than ex-officio Members shall have 
at least fifteen years of relevant professional experience and a 
demonstrable record of contribution to diaspora engagement or in their 
respective field, as may be prescribed. 


Provided further that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, 
ensure gender and regional diversity in its composition, with at least 
one-third representation from each gender and adequate representation 
from different global regions. 


(2) The Chairperson and non-ex-officio members shall hold office for a 
term of three years, from the date of entering upon their office, and shall be 
eligible for re-appointment for one more term not exceeding three years: 


Provided that such re-appointment shall be subject to the 
recommendation of a Search and Selection Committee constituted for the 
purpose with such composition and on the basis of the performance review 
of the person being considered for re-appointment, to be conducted in such 
manner, as may be prescribed; 


Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or a 
Member for more than two consecutive terms. 


(3) The Central Government shall, from time to time, appoint such 
number of officers and staff to the Authority, as may be required to 
assist it in its efficient functioning, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The method of recruitment and qualifications and experience for the 
officers and staff of the Authority as well as the salary and allowances 
payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Members, officers, and staff of the Authority shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


The Authority shall, perform all or any of the following functions, 
namely,— 


(a) develop and maintain, in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, a centralized Diaspora Database, including therein 
registration of skills and professions of persons belonging to the 
Indian diaspora via Indian embassies or digital platforms, in 
compliance with the provisions of the Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023 and all relevant data privacy laws, rules and 
regulations, for the time being in force; 


133 


Powers and 
functions of the 
Authority. 


Registration 
and data 
integrity. 


134 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(b) design and administer transparent incentive programs, 
including tax benefits, research grants, and housing subsidies, for 
diaspora professionals returning to the country, with publicly 
notified criteria and processes; 


(c) establish a digital platform for mentorship, collaboration, 
and investment opportunities between diaspora and Indian 
stakeholders, in such form and manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) issue Diaspora Bonds, subject to compliance with the 
provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; and the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 and all relevant rules and regulations, for the 
time being in force and ensure risk management, transparency of use, 
and investor protection; 


(e) facilitate reintegration programs, including _ skill 
certification and professional placement for members of the Indian 
diaspora, returning to the country; 


(f) collaborate with international organizations and host countries 
for mutual recognition of qualifications, referencing relevant 
international conventions and bilateral agreements; 


(g) promote public-private partnerships for sector-specific skilling 
and innovation, with clear roles, obligations, and oversight 
mechanisms, and mandatory disclosure and management of conflicts of 
interest; 


(h) make policy recommendations for performance-based funding 
for diaspora-led initiatives and other matters related to the effective 
implementation of this Act to the Central Government; 


(60) establish consular services for skill mapping and 
certification; 


(j) issue guidelines for data integrity, grievance redressal, and 
protection against recruitment malpractices; 


(k) periodically monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of all 
incentive schemes and Public-Private Partnerships and publish its 
findings in the Annual Report; and 


(9 such other functions as may be required for implementing the 
provisions of this Act or as are assigned to it by the Central 
Government, from time to time. 


CHAPTER HI 
REGISTRATION IN DIASPORA DATABASE 


(1) Every member of the Indian diaspora, shall, in such form and manner 
and within such time, as may be prescribed, get his name and skills, 
professional qualifications and such other particulars as may be specified, 
registered in the Diaspora Database to be maintained by the Authority, 
either through the diplomatic missions or embassies of India abroad or 
through such secure digital platform as may be notified. 


(2) Any person registered under sub-section (/) shall, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, be eligible for priority access to incentive 
programs, professional networking, and reintegration support, in such 
manner as may be prescribed: 


2 of 1934. 
15 of 1992. 
42 of 1999. 


22 of 2023. 


2 of 1934. 


15 of 1992. 
42 of 1999. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Provided that persons, who are not registered under sub-section (J) 
shall not be eligible for benefits under this sub-section and as prescribed by 
rules made under this Act. 


(3) All collection, storage, and processing of data under this Act shall 
strictly comply with the provisions of the Digital Personal Data Protection 
Act, 2023, and any other relevant law, rules and regulations, for the time 
being in force. 


(4) Whoever, for the purpose of registration under this section, furnishes, 
false or misleading data to the Authority, shall be liable to such penalty as 
specified under section 15, including exclusion from incentive programs, 
under sub-section (2). 


CHAPTER IV 
INCENTIVES AND DIASPORA BONDS 


(1) The Central Government shall, immediately after commencement of this 
Act, notify transparent processes and criteria for the award of incentives 
referred to under sub-section (/) of section 6, including but not limited to 
financial benefits, housing subsidies, and research grants to eligible 
applicants, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) All applications submitted for award of such incentives, in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed, shall be processed by the Authority in a 
time-bound and fair manner, with reasons for acceptance or rejection 
thereof, to be communicated to the applicant in writing: 


Provided that an applicant aggrieved by the decision of the 
Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Authority as provided 
under section 16. 


(3) The Authority shall establish an online portal accessible to the general 
public for tracking the status of incentive applications and appeals preferred 
under section 16. 


(1) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, 
issue Diaspora Bonds in such form and manner and subject to such terms 
and conditions as may be prescribed, for specific infrastructure and 
innovation projects, under this Act as may be determined by the Authority, 
in compliance with the provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 
the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992; the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 and all relevant rules and regulations 
made thereunder, for the time being in force. 


(2) The Authority shall ensure robust risk management, transparency in 
investment utilization, and investor protection mechanisms, including 
timely disclosure of project progress, financial statements and such other 
safeguards as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER V 
PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS AND INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION 
(1) All Public-Private Partnerships undertaken for the purposes of this Act 
shall be governed by a framework to be notified by the Authority, in such 
form and manner, as may be prescribed, specifying the roles, obligations, 


oversight, performance benchmarks and such other matters as may be 
required. 


135 


Incentive 
administration. 


Diaspora Bonds. 


Public-Private 
Partnerships. 


International 
collaboration and 
qualification 
recognition. 


Monitoring and 
Evaluation 
Committee. 


Funds of the 
Authority. 


Audit of 
accounts. 


Annual report. 


136 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(2) Every party to a Public-Private Partnership shall, in such form and 
manner and within such time as may be prescribed, disclose any actual or 
potential conflicts of interest, which shall be managed as per the rules made 
under this Act. 


(3) Every organization, which seeks to engage with the Indian diaspora for 
the purpose of investment or collaboration shall comply with such standards 
as may be laid down by regulations made by the Authority in this regard. 


(4) The Authority shall, within at the end of each financial year, publish an 
annual summary of all Public-Private Partnerships, including performance 
and compliance status, and such annual summary shall form part of the 
Annual Report of the Authority. 


(1) The Authority may, in consultation with the Central Government, 
collaborate with Governments of other countries and _ international 
institutions in accordance with diplomatic protocols and Indian foreign 
policy, to facilitate diaspora engagement and mutual recognition of 
professional and academic qualifications. 


(2) The Authority shall develop and notify, in such form and manner as may 
be prescribed, clear frameworks for such qualification recognition, 
referencing relevant international conventions and bilateral agreements. 


CHAPTER VI 
GOVERNANCE AND FINANCE 


(1) The Authority shall set up, in such manner as may be prescribed, an 
independent Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, consisting of Members 
of the Authority, to periodically review the effectiveness, transparency, and 
impact of all incentive schemes and Public-Private Partnerships. 


(2) The findings of the Committee constituted under sub-section (/) shall be 
published in the Annual Report and made available on the Authority’s 
website. 


(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority may receive grants, donations, and other contributions, 
including consultancy income with the approval of the Central Government, 
subject to compliance of the provisions of the Foreign Contribution 
(Regulation) Act, 2010 and all applicable laws, rules and regulations for the 
time being in force, as well as amounts accrued on account of monetary 
penalties imposed for offences under the Act. 


(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


(1) The Authority shall prepare at the end of every calendar year, an annual 
report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous 
year, detailing diaspora engagement outcomes, skill mobilization trends, 


42 of 2010. 


SEC. 2] 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


policy recommendations, annual summary of Public-Private Partnerships 
under sub-section (3) of section 9, findings of the Committee under sub- 
section (2) of section 11 etc. in such form as may be prescribed and copies 
thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause 
to be laid before each House of Parliament, the annual report along with a 
memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendation(s) of the Authority and the reasons, if any, for non- 
acceptance of the recommendation(s), made therein. 


CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND APPEAL 


(1) Any person or an entity found to have willfully provided false or 
misleading data to the Authority or contravened or attempted to contravene 
or abetted the contravention of any of the provisions of the Act or any rules 
or regulations made thereunder, shall be liable to penalties which may 
include,— 


(a) exclusion from all incentive programs for a period not less 
than three years, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) a monetary penalty which may extend upto five lakh rupees in 
the case of individuals and fifty lakh rupees in the case of entities or 
organizations: 


Provided that the quantum of penalty to be imposed shall be 
determined by the Authority based on the nature and gravity of the 
offence or contravention, as the case may be, by rules made under this 
Act. 


(c) blacklisting from participation in any incentive scheme or 
programme under this Act for a period which may extend to ten years, 
in case of repeated or egregious violation. 


(2) No penalty shall be imposed under sub-section (/) without giving the 
accused party, — 


(a) a written notice of the grounds on which the penalty is 
proposed to be imposed; 


(b) a reasonable opportunity of being represented and heard; 


(c) without establishing beyond doubt the offence for which the 
penalty is proposed to be imposed: 


Provided that the order imposing a penalty shall be a speaking 
order clearly recording in writing the reasons for imposition of the 
penalty. 


(1) Any person or entity aggrieved by an order, decision or action of the 
Authority under this Act, may, prefer an appeal in such form and manner 
and within such time as may be prescribed, to such Appellate Authority, as 
may be established by the Central Government by rules made under this 
Act, within such period from the date of filing of the appeal, as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, extend the period of filing of appeal by such further period as 
may be prescribed. 


137 


Penalty 
mechanism. 


Appeals. 


138 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(2) The Appellate Authority shall, after giving the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and after making such inquiry as it deems fit, 
pass such speaking order thereon, as it considers appropriate, and every 
such order shall state clearly in writing the reasons therefor. 


(3) The order of the Authority made under sub-section (2) shall be final and 
shall not be called in question in any court or before any other authority, 
save as otherwise provided in this Act or the rules made thereunder. 


Offences by 17. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 

ic cael every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that Offences by 
companies, he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of 
such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 


Offences by 18. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or 

ae ang trust or agency or institution, every person who at the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust or 
agency or institution for the conduct of the business of the society or trust or 
university, as well as the society or trust or agency or institution, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a society or trust or agency or 
institution and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any 
governors, vice-chancellor, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other 
officer, such governors, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


SEC. 2] 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with 
the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all 
matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
implementing the provisions of this Act. 


(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


No suit or prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Authority or its members for actions taken in good faith in pursuance of this 
Act or of any rules or orders made thereunder. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing such difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


139 


Power to make 
rules. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Act to override 
other laws. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


140 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India has the largest diaspora population in the world, with over 18 million 
Indians living abroad, spanning diverse regions and professions from science, 
medicine, technology, education, and engineering to entrepreneurship, diplomacy, 
and the arts. In 2023 alone, the Indian diaspora contributed an estimated $119.5 
billion in remittances, making it a critical pillar of India’s economic resilience and 
foreign exchange stability. Yet, despite its vast size, influence, and goodwill, India 
currently lacks a structured national framework to map, coordinate, and mobilise 
the skills, expertise, and institutional capital of its global Indian community for the 
country’s developmental priorities. 


This Bill seeks to fill that policy void by establishing the Indian Diaspora 
Skills and Talent Authority, a statutory and autonomous institution mandated to 
identify, register, and engage diaspora professionals spread across various 
countries and sectors through a centralized digital Diaspora Database, structured 
incentive programs, and institutional partnerships. The Authority will serve as a 
single-window mechanism to enable strategic collaboration between diaspora 
individuals and Indian stakeholders, including government departments, 
Universities, startups, hospitals, think tanks, and civil society organizations. 


The Authority will also be empowered to facilitate return migration incentives 
for high-skill professionals, issue diaspora bonds for infrastructure and innovation 
financing, and launch fellowships, sabbaticals, and mentorship schemes that foster 
sustained engagement. These interventions shall be aligned with India’s long-term 
national missions such as Viksit Bharat @2047, Make in India, Digital India, and 
Atmanirbhar Bharat, thereby contributing directly to economic growth, skill 
transfer, technology absorption, and global competitiveness. 


The design of this Authority draws inspiration from international best 
practices. Ireland’s “Global Irish Network”, China’s “Thousand Talents Plan”, and 
the Philippines’ “Balik Scientist Program” have all demonstrated that structured 
diaspora engagement enhances innovation ecosystems and accelerates national 
progress. Similarly, several states in India (e.g., Kerala, Gujarat, Punjab) have 
shown localised success in engaging their diaspora, but a national platform is 
essential to scale these efforts and avoid fragmentation. 


Crucially, the Authority will recognise the diversity of India’s diaspora, across 
generations, geographies, professions, and aspirations, by offering customized 
modes of engagement, including virtual collaboration, short-term visits, long-term 
placements, and philanthropic or advisory roles. It will ensure data-driven 
planning, inter-ministerial coordination, and global outreach through India’s 
missions abroad. 


The Bill incorporates international best practices in data protection, financial 
regulation, and public-private partnership governance, and provides for robust 
compliance, grievance redressal, and transparency mechanisms to ensure that the 
mobilization of diaspora skills and resources is ethical, effective, and in the 
national interest. 


In an era of brain circulation rather than brain drain, the Indian diaspora is no 
longer just a sentimental asset but a strategic force multiplier for India's rise as a 
global knowledge power, economic powerhouse, and diplomatic leader. 
Harnessing their expertise systematically and ethically is no longer optional, it is 
imperative. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SATNAM SINGH SANDHU. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 141 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the Indian Diaspora 
Skills and Talent Authority whereas clause 4 provides for the composition of the 
Authority, the appointment of officers and staff to assist the Authority, the salaries 
and allowances payable to as well as other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Members and officers and staff thereof. Clause 5 sets out the 
functions of the Authority, including inter alia development and maintenance of a 
centralized Diaspora Database, designing and administering of inventive programs, 
establishment of a digital platform for mentorship, collaboration and investments 
opportunities between diaspora and Indian stakeholders, facilitation of 
reintegration programs including skill certification and professional placement for 
returning diaspora, establish consular services for skill mapping and certification. 
Clause 7 provides that the Central Government shall make available adequate 
funds to the Indian Diaspora Skills and Talent Authority, as may be deemed 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. Though it is not 
possible at this stage to determine the exact expenditure likely to be incurred, an 
initial outlay of five hundred crore rupees is estimated for non-recurring 
expenditure towards infrastructure, digital platforms, and database setup. A 
recurring expenditure of one hundred and fifty crore rupees per annum is expected 
as recurring expenditure for operations, incentive programs, and international 
collaborations. 


142 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 19 empowers the Central Government to make rules and the Authority, 
with the approval of the Central Government, to make regulations for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. Clause 22 provides that the Central Government may 
make such order or give such direction, as may be necessary, for removing any 
difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the orders or rules or regulations relate to the matters of procedural and 
administrative details only, the delegation of the legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 143 


XVII 


Bill No. LXVIII of 2025 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a statutory authority for ranking and 
accreditation of higher educational institutions in the country, 
ensuring transparency, excellence, and alignment with 
national and global standards, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the National Ranking and Accreditation Short title and 
Authority for Higher Educational Institutions Act, 2025. ae 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


144 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Definitions. 2.  Inthis Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “accreditation” means the certification of a higher educational 
institution’s quality based on tiered levels as specified under this Act; 


(b) “Authority” means the National Ranking and Accreditation 
Authority established under section 3; 


(c) “higher educational institution” means any university, deemed 
university, college, or autonomous institution offering undergraduate, 
postgraduate, or research-level education, recognized by the University 
Grants Commission or any other regulatory body; 


(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(e) “Public Dashboard” means a digital platform for transparent 
access to institutional performance data under clause (d) of section 5; 
and 


(f) “ranking” means the assessment and public placement of 
higher educational institutions based on customizable parameters such 
as academic quality, research output, employability, inclusivity, 
governance, and innovation. 

CHAPTER II 


THE NATIONAL RANKING AND ACCREDITATION AUTHORITY 


Establishment 3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
का Gazette, establish an authority to be known as the National Ranking 
Accreditation and Accreditation Authority for Higher Educational Institutions to 
Authority. exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions assigned 


to it under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold, and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or 
be sued. 


(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at New Delhi. 


Composition of 4. (1) The Authority shall consist of the following Members,— 
the Authority. 


(a) a person having at least twenty five years of experience in 
the field of higher education or public administration, to be 
appointed by the President of India by warrant under his hand and 
seal in consultation with the Central Government, as Chairperson; 


(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry 
of Education - Member ex-officio; 


(c) the Chairperson of the University Grants Commission— 
Member ex-officio; 


(d) one eminent Indian expert possessing global experience in 
education rankings, to be appointed by the Central Government in 
such manner as may be prescribed - Member; 


(e) two representatives from State Universities, out of which, 
one shall be from a rural or aspirational district, to be appointed 
by the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — 
Members; 


(f) one person having expertise in data science and blockchain 
technology, to be appointed by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed — Member; 


22 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 145 


(9) one woman educationist from a Tier- II city or rural area 
to be appointed by the Central Government in such manner as may 
be prescribed — Member; 


(h) one representative from an industry-academia partnership 
body such as Confederation of Indian Industry or the Federation of 
Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry, to be nominated by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed — 
Member; 


(i) one student representative from a recognized national 
student body to be nominated by the Central Government in such 
manner as may be prescribed - Member; and 


@) one employer representative from a sectoral industry body 
to be nominated by the Central Government in such manner as 
may be prescribed — Member: 


Provided that the Central Government shall ensure gender, 
regional and sectoral diversity in the composition of the Authority. 


(2) The Chairperson shall hold office for a term of five years from the date 
on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for reappointment 
for one more term: 


Provided that no person shall hold office as Chairperson after attaining 
the age of seventy years. 


(3) The Central Government shall, from time to time, appoint such 
number of officers and staff to the Authority, as may be required, to 
assist it in its efficient functioning, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of the Chairperson, Members, officers and staff as 
well as the term of office of the Members other than the ex-officio 
Members of the Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


The Authority shall, perform all or any of the following functions with 
respect to higher educational institutions in the country, namely, — 


(a) develop and publish in the Official Gazette annually a 
National Ranking Framework aligned with the National Education 
Policy, 2020, the Mission Statement of Viksit Bharat 2047, and 
globally recognized University rating systems and standards, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) accredit institutions using a five - tiered system, with first four 
Levels as Institutions of National Excellence and the fifth Level as 
Institutions of Global Excellence, in such manner as may be prescribed, 
and lay down standards, norms and policies for assessment of the 
academic quality in higher educational institutions for granting such 
accreditation; 


(c) undertake periodical review of norms and policies referred to 
in clause (5); 


(qd) develop and maintain 3 blockchain-based Public 
Dashboard for real-time, tamper-proof access to rankings, 
accreditation status, and performance metrics of higher 
educational institutions: 


Provided that any data processing done in this regard shall comply 
with the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, including audit 
trails for consent management, and provisions for data anonymization 
and opt-out consent for sensitive metrics; 


Powers and 
functions of the 
Authority. 


146 


Mandatory 6. 
participation in 

the ranking and 

accreditation 

process. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(e) promote regional equity and innovation by designing context- 
specific metrics for institutions in rural and minority-serving areas, and 
aspirational districts; 


(f) collaborate with international organizations for benchmarking 
and cross-border recognition; 


(g) develop outcome-based metrics, including graduate 
employability, economic impact, and student engagement; 


(h) recommend institutions to the Central Government for 
performance-based funding and incentives; 


(i) issue guidelines for data integrity, including penalties for 
falsification, and establish a grievance redressal mechanism; 


(j) provide customized rankings based on user priorities such as 
teaching, research, affordability; 


(k) conduct risk-based assessments tailored to institutional type 
such as research universities, teaching colleges 


(9 levy of fees or other charges as may be required under this Act; 


(m) define, by rules made under this Act, the parameters for 
determining severity levels for penalties, proportionate to and 
differentiated according to the nature and gravity of the contraventions 
of the provisions of this Act, such as minor discrepancies, deliberate 
inaccuracies, or fraudulent manipulation; and 


(n) make policy recommendations for improving the standards of 
higher educational institutions to the Central and State Governments, as 
may be required, from time to time; 


(o) such other functions as may be required for implementing the 
provisions of this Act or as are assigned to it by the Central 
Government, from time to time. 


CHAPTER III 


OBLIGATION OF HIGHER EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FOR PARTICIPATION 
IN THE RANKING AND ACCREDITATION PROCESS 


(1) Every higher educational institutions established, maintained or 
substantially financed by the Central Government, institutions of national 
importance and every University established by a State Government, either 
existing before commencement of this Act or established thereafter, shall 
mandatorily participate in the ranking and accreditation process conducted 
by the Authority, in such form and manner and within such time as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that a State University may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, seek exemption from such participation, subject to approval by the 
Authority. 


(2) Any private institution, may also apply for participation in the ranking 
and accreditation process conducted by the Authority in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that upon such application being accepted, the private 
institution shall comply with all standards as may be specified by or under 
this Act. 


(3) The Authority on receipt of applications under sub-sections (1) and (2), 
shall after satisfying itself of the level of compliance of the institution with 
the standards, norms and policies laid down under the Act and the rules and 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 147 


regulations made thereunder, accord ranking and accreditation in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations 
made thereunder: 


Provided that the ranking and accreditation accorded shall be subject to 
periodic review by the Authority to ensure continued compliance with the 
standards, norms and policies laid down under the Act and the rules and 
regulations made thereunder. 


CHAPTER IV 
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND APPEAL 


(1) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the 
contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations made 
thereunder, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to ten lakh 
rupees: 


Provided that the quantum of penalty to be imposed shall be determined 
by the Authority based on the severity level proportionate to and 
differentiated according to the nature and gravity of the contravention: 


Provided further that no penalty shall be imposed without giving the 
concerned person or institution a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
without establishing the nature and gravity of contravention beyond doubt. 


(2) Any higher educational institution aggrieved by the imposition of a 
penalty under this Act may prefer an appeal in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed, to such Appellate Authority, as may be established by 
the Central government by rules made under this Act, which shall dispose of 
the appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of its filing: 


Provided that the Appellate Authority may, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, extend period of filing of appeal by such further period as may 
be prescribed. 


(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
firm. 


(/) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a society or 
trust or agency or institution, every person who at the time the offence was 
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the society or trust or 
agency or institution for the conduct of the business of the society or trust or 


Penalties and 
Appeal. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Offences by 
society, trust and 
institutions. 


148 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


university, as well as the society or trust or agency or institution, shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he has exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a society or trust or agency or 
institution and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any 
governors, vice-chancellor, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other 
officer, such govemors, directors, committee, trustees, registrar or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to 
be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


CHAPTER V 
GOVERNANCE AND FINANCE 
Funds of the 10. (1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 


Authority. Parliament by law in this behalf, grant such sums of money to the 
Authority, as it may think fit, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The Authority may also receive grants, donations, and other 
contributions, including by way of consultancy service provided, with the 
approval of the Central Government and amounts accrued on account of 
fees, charges and monetary penalties imposed. 


(3) The initial outlay and recurring expenditure shall be subject to review 
after five years from the date of commencement of this Act. 


Accounts and 11. (Z) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 

Audit. and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by 
him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the 
same to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


Annual Report. 12. (J) The Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year as 
well as the rankings and accreditation accorded, accreditation outcomes, 
performance trends, policy recommendations etc. and copies thereof shall 
be forwarded to the Central Government. 


(2) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after its receipt, cause 
to be laid before each House of Parliament, the annual report along with a 
memorandum of action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendation(s) of the Authority and the reasons, if any, for non- 
acceptance of the recommendation(s) made therein. 


(3) Where the report or any of part thereof relates to any matter with which 
any State Government is concerned, the Authority shall forward a copy of 
such report or part thereof to the concerned State Government, who shall 
in turn, cause it to be laid before each House of the State Legislature, where 
it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, 
before that House, along with an explanatory memorandum on the action 
taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendation(s) related to the State, 
and reasons, if any, for not accepting any of the recommendation(s) made 
therein. 


SEC. 2] 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 149 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree 
that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Authority or its 
members or its officers for actions taken in good faith in pursuance of this 
Act or of any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may make such order or give such direction, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to be necessary 
or expedient for removing such difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Power to make 
tules. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Act to override 
other laws. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


150 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


India’s aspiration to emerge as a global knowledge superpower by 2047 
necessitates the creation of a credible, transparent, and statutory framework for 
evaluating the performance and potential of its higher educational institutions. At 
present, mechanisms like the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), 
while commendable, there is a need for a full-fledged legislation to regulate 
various aspects of the subject matter. Further, these frameworks are often not 
sufficiently aligned with international benchmarking standards such as QS World 
Rankings or Times Higher Education (THE), leading to underrepresentation of 
Indian institutions on the global stage. 


This Bill seeks to address these systemic deficiencies by proposing the 
establishment of a National Ranking and Accreditation Authority (NRAA), which 
would be an independent, statutory body under the aegis of the Ministry of 
Education, that will serve as the single-point national authority for ranking, 
accrediting, and benchmarking all higher educational institutions across India. The 
Bill mandates compulsory participation for all centrally funded institutions, 
institutes of national importance, and State Universities, thereby ensuring 
universal applicability and comparability. 


The proposed Authority will be empowered to develop a multi-dimensional, 
outcome-oriented ranking framework, incorporating parameters such as academic 
excellence, research output, industry linkages, employability of graduates, 
inclusivity, governance, innovation, and societal impact. It will promote regional 
equity by integrating special weightages for institutions in aspirational districts, 
Tier-2/Tier-3 cities, and minority-serving regions. The inclusion of blockchain- 
based data verification tools will significantly enhance data credibility and 
minimize manual intervention, while enabling third-party audits and full public 
transparency through digital dashboards. 


The NRAA will also work in close collaboration with global ranking 
agencies, enabling Indian institutions to leapfrog onto international ranking 
platforms. Customizable ranking outputs, allowing stakeholders such as students, 
employers, and policymakers to prioritize different metrics, will make the rankings 
dynamic, inclusive, and user responsive. This will directly contribute to evidence- 
based policy reforms, performance-linked funding mechanisms, and student- 
centric decision-making, in line with the transformative vision of the National 
Education Policy (NEP) 2020. 


In a time when global academic capital is increasingly mobile and 
competitive, the absence of a robust, data-driven, and outcome-aligned National 
Ranking Authority has become a critical policy gap. By filling this vacuum, the 
present Bill seeks to elevate India’s global academic reputation, empower students 
with accurate information, hold institutions accountable, and _ incentivize 
excellence across the public and private spectrum of higher education. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SATNAM SINGH SANDHU. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 151 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Ranking 
and Accreditation Authority, while clause 4 provides for its composition and for 
the appointment of officers, and staff to the Authority to assist it in the efficient 
discharge of its functions as well as for the salaries, allowances and service 
conditions of the Chairperson, Members, officers and staff of the Authority. 
Clause 5 sets out the functions of the Authority, including, inter alia, to develop a 
blockchain-based Public Dashboard for real-time, tamper-proof access to rankings, 
accreditation status, and performance metrics. Clause 10 of the Bill provides that 
the Central Government shall provide funds to the Authority for carrying out the 
purposes of the Bill. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, will involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. At this stage, 
though the exact expenditure cannot be determined, the non-recurring expenditure 
on infrastructure, blockchain technology and data systems is estimated to be rupees 
six hundred crore, while the recurring expenditure for operations, data verification, 
stakeholder engagement and international collaborations is estimated to be rupees 
two hundred crore per annum. 


152 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the appropriate Government to make rules 
for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the 
Central Government to make such provisions through an order for removing any 
difficulty that might arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of procedural and administrative 
detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 153 


खेर 


Bill No. LXXIV of 2025 


A Bill further to amend the National Commission for Women Act, 1990. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


1. (J)This Act may be called the National Commission for Women Short title and 
(Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Substitution of 
section 5. 


Officers, experts 
and other 
employees of 
the Commission. 


Amendment of 


section 10. 


154 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART H— 
.. 2. वा the National Commission for Women Act, 1990 (hereinafterreferred to. —SCS0 off 19990. 
as the principal Act), in section 4, in sub-section (/), for the words “not 


exceeding three years”, the words “not exceeding five years”, shall be 
substituted. 


3. In the principal Act, for section 5, the following shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“5. (1) The Commission shall, for the efficient discharge of the 
functions of the Commission, create such number of regular and 
temporary posts in Groups ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ categories, as it may 
consider necessary. 


(2) The regular posts so created under sub-section (7) shall be 
filled on deputation basis from amongst officers of the Central 
Government or State Governments possessing the requisite 
qualifications and experience, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Commission may fill short-term or project-based posts 
on contractual basis, from amongst persons possessing such 
qualifications and experience and in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The Commission may, for the purpose of providing technical 
or field-level inputs in specific areas relating to its mandate, engage, 
with the prior approval of the Central Government, field experts, 
consultants, or domain specialists, including field officers stationed in 
different regions of the country for on-site inspections, fact-finding 
and coordination with the State Commissions and local authorities, for 
a period not exceeding one year, which may be extended for a further 
period not exceeding one year, on such terms and conditions as may 
be prescribed. 


(5) The Commission may, for the effective implementation of its 
programmes and for undertaking studies, outreach or capacity- 
building activities, collaborate or enter into arrangements with non- 
governmental organisations, civil society groups, research institutions, 
or professional associations working in the field of women’s rights 
and empowerment, as may be deemed necessary. 


(6) The officers, experts, consultants and employees appointed 
to or engaged with the Commission shall be governed by the Central 
Civil Services Rules and such other service conditions including 
salary structure and allowances, as may be notified by the Central 
Government from time to time. 


(7) The Commission shall have an Investigative Wing, 
comprising officers on deputation from the police and other law 
enforcement agencies under the Central Government, which shall 
assist the Commission in conducting inquiries and investigations and 
for coordination with the State Police and other authorities for the 
effective implementation of its directions.” 


4. Inthe principal Act, in section 10:— 


(i) in sub-section (J), after clause (m), the following new clause 
shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(ma) utilise funds, including allocations made from the 
Nirbhaya Fund or any other special purpose fund, constituted or 
established for providing relief, rehabilitation, legal aid, 
counselling or other assistance to victims of violence against 
women, in such manner as may be prescribed;” 


(ii) after sub-section (3), the following new sub-section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


45 of 2023. 


46 of 2023. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 

SA) Where any =recommendation, report or 
communication is made by the Commission to any State 
Government, the Chief Secretary of that State shall, within 


seventy-two hours of receipt thereof, acknowledge the same and 
indicate — 


(a) the action taken or proposed to be taken on such 
recommendation, report or communication, as the case 
may be; and 

(b) the likely time-frame for completion of such 


action: 


Provided that where immediate action is not possible for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, the Chief Secretary shall 
communicate such reasons to the Commission within the time- 
frame under clause (b).” 


(iii) after sub-section (4), the following new sub-sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“(5) Every proceeding conducted by the Commission in 
the exercise of its powers under sub-section (4) shall be deemed 
to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 227, 
230 and 354 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and the 
Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes 
of sections 336 and 337 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita, 2023. 


(6) Where— 


(a) any authority or officer, including any police 
officer, without reasonable cause, fails to comply with any 
lawful direction, summons or order issued by the 
Commission, such failure shall be deemed to constitute a 
breach of official duty and the Commission may report the 
matter to the competent disciplinary authority for such 
action as may be taken under the applicable service rules; 
or 


(b) any other person wilfully disobeys or obstructs 
the proceedings of the Commission, such person shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees, or with both and in the case 
of continuing default, with an additional fine which may 
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees for every day during 
which the default continues: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent 
prosecution of such person for any more serious offence under 
any other provision of law for the time being in force. 


(7) Where, after inquiry, the Commission finds that any 
person has wilfully furnished false or misleading information or 
produced false documents in relation to any proceeding before 
the Commission, the Commission may— 


(a) refer the matter to the competent authority for 
disciplinary proceedings, where the person is an officer or 
public servant; and/or 


(b) recommend initiation of criminal proceedings to 
the appropriate law enforcement agency for offences as 
may be made out under the penal law for the time being in 


155 


156 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART HI— 
ss Force, including for furnishing false evidence, perjury or 7 
obstruction of justice. 
(6) The Commission may, in appropriate cases, order 
payment of costs or compensation, not exceeding such amount 


as may be prescribed, for wilful disobedience of its directions or 
for causing obstruction in the discharge of its functions. 


(9) Where the post of Chairperson of any State 
Commission for Women, or more than one-half of the posts of 
its Members, remains vacant for a period exceeding one month, 
the National Commission may take swo motu cognizance of the 
matter and seek from the State Government concerned, a report 
indicating the reasons for such vacancy(ies), the delay in filling 
them and the steps taken or proposed to be taken to fill the same 
and recommend filling up of the said vacancy(ies) within a 
stipulated time-frame.” 


Amendment of 5. In the principal Act, in section 17, in sub-section (2):— 
section 17. 


(i) after clause (a), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely :— 


“(aa) the terms and conditions for engagement of 
consultants, field officers, experts, and the constitution and 
functioning of the Investigative Wing under sub-section (7) of 
section 5;”. 


(ii) after clause (c), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely :— 


“(ca) the procedure for utilisation of funds, including 
special purpose funds, under clause (ma) of sub-section (/) of 
section 10;”. 


SEC. 2] 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS  ———<“—i—CSs 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


The National Commission for Women was established through the 
National Commission for Women Act, 1990, at a time when the nation 
sought to give institutional form to its constitutional promise of equality, 
dignity, and justice for every woman. The Commission was envisioned as 
the voice and guardian of women’s rights—an independent body that could 
investigate, advise, and intervene where those rights were denied. 


Over the past three decades, however, the social, digital, and 
economic landscape of India has transformed profoundly. Women today 
face new and complex challenges—ranging from online harassment and 
workplace discrimination to systemic barriers in justice delivery and welfare 
access. The Commission’s largely recommendatory role and limited 
enforcement powers under the existing law have constrained its ability to 
secure compliance or accountability from public authorities. 


Repeated calls for reform have been made over the years. The 
Commission itself proposed amendments in 2013, which were subsequently 
reviewed and concurred upon by the concerned Ministries in 2015. More 
recently, the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Empowerment of 
Women (2023-24) has strongly urged the Government to revisit and 
strengthen the National Commission for Women Act, 1990, to align it with 
contemporary realities. 


This Amendment Bill seeks to enhance the tenure of Members to 
ensure continuity and institutional memory; provides for the engagement of 
experts, field officers, and an Investigative Wing to strengthen inquiry and 
coordination; empowers the Commission with enforceable powers akin to 
those of a civil court; introduces penalties for wilful disobedience or 
obstruction; and ensures accountability of State Governments in filling 
vacancies and implementing recommendations. 


The Bill is thus an effort to restore the Commission’s founding 
purpose—to be not merely a recommending body, but a responsive and 
effective institution capable of upholding the rights and dignity of women 
across India. It is a reaffirmation of faith in the vision with which the 
Commission was born—one of vigilance, compassion, and courage—and a 
step towards ensuring that the hopes placed in it by generations of women 
are neither diminished nor deferred. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SWATI MALIWAL. 


157 


158 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. XI_ of 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) 
Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


SEC. 2] 


Amendment 2. 


of section 3. 


Substitution 3. 


of a new 
section for 
section 23. 


Packaging, 
labelling, 
disclosure of 
information 
relating to 
food. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 159 


In the Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in section 3, in sub-section (/), after clause(zg), the following 
clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(zga) “nutritional grade” means the interpretive assessment of 
the nutritional profile of an article of food, in accordance with such 
standards as may be prescribed under this Act;”. 


For section 23 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“23. (1) No packaged food shall be manufactured, packed, imported, 
distributed, sold, offered for sale or displayed for sale, including 
through electronic commerce, unless it is packaged and labelled in the 
manner provided in this Act and the regulations made thereunder. 


(2) Every packaged food shall bear, on its label and in any digital or 
online representation thereof, true and complete particulars as to its 
nature, composition, ingredients, origin, net quantity, date of 
manufacture, expiry or best-before date, nutritional information, and 
such other matters as may be specified by regulations: 


Provided that such labels shall not contain any statement, design, 
device, symbol, brand name or pictorial representation which is false, 
misleading, deceptive or likely to create an erroneous impression as to 
the character, substance, quality, quantity, composition or health 
attributes of such food. 


(3) Every packaged food shall display, on the front-of-pack, 
supplementary nutritional information in the form of a front-of-pack 
nutrition labelling, which shall include an interpretive nutritional 
grade, represented by letter grades “A” to “E” indicating the overall 
nutritional profile of the product, where— 


(a) Grade “A” represents products of highest nutritional 
quality, and Grade “E” represents products of lowest nutritional 
quality; 


(b) the grading shall be determined based on nutrient- 
profiling standards taking into account energy, total sugars, 
added sugars, saturated fats, trans fats and sodium, and any other 
material parameters or factors as may be specified by 
regulations; and 


(c) the nutritional grade shall be displayed on the principal 
display panel of the package in such form, size and colour as 
may be specified by regulations. 


(4) The Food Authority shall, for the purpose of implementing this 
section— 


(a) constitute a Scientific Advisory Committee on 
Nutritional Labelling consisting of representatives from the 
Indian Council of Medical Research, the National Institute of 
Nutrition and such other experts in public health nutrition, 
food technology and consumer affairs as may be prescribed; 
and 


(b) specify by regulations,within six months of the 
commencement of the Food Safety and Standards (Amendment) 
Act, 2026 Act— 


(i) the format and presentation of the front-of-pack 
nutrition labelling and nutritional grade system; and 


(ii) nutrient-profiling standards and threshold limits 


34 of 2006 


160 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


for the nutrients referred to in this section. 


(5) The Food Authority may, for facilitating equitable and practicable 
compliance, provide by regulations for differential or phased 
implementation, simplified disclosure formats or extended timelines 
for such classes of food business operators, including micro, small and 
medium enterprises, as may be specified. 


(6) For the purposes of sub-section (5), the Food Authority shall— 


(a) establish or designate through notification a 
network of accredited laboratories and testing facilities to 
assist such classes of food business operators in determining 
nutrient profiles and obtain ingnutritional gradesat cost- 
effective rates; 


(b) frame, in consultation with the Central and State 
Governments, schemes for capacity-building, technical 
assistance and awareness programmes to _ support 
compliance by micro, small and medium enterprises; and 


(c) publish annual reports detailing the implementation of 
such facilitation measures. 


(7) The Food Authority shall by regulations, specify transparent and 
science-based procedures for verification, inspection and monitoring 
of compliance with the provisions of this section, including— 


(a) authorisation of Designated Officers and Food Safety 
Officers to conduct periodic and surprise inspections of 
manufacturing, packing, storage and retail premises, and to 
collect samples of packaged foods for analysis in accredited 
laboratories; 


(b) creation of an online public portal under the Food 
Authority for submission, acknowledgment and tracking of 
complaints relating to mislabelling, misleading claims or 
incorrect nutritional grades, which shall— 


(i) automatically acknowledge receipt of every 
complaint within twenty-four hours of submission, 
assigning a unique tracking number; 


(ii) automatically route each complaint to the 
Designated Officer of the district concerned within forty- 
eight hours of receipt for preliminary scrutiny; 


(iii) require the Designated Officer to cause an initial 
verification or inspection to be undertaken within fifteen 
days of receipt and to record findings on the portal; 


(iv) require that final action or closure of the 
complaint, including laboratory results and enforcement 
measures, be completed and uploaded within a period not 
exceeding sixty days from the date of receipt of the 
complaint; 


(v) provide for automatic escalation of any 
unresolved complaint beyond sixty days to the State 
Commissioner of Food Safety, and beyond ninety days to 
the Food Authority for supervisory review; and 


(vi) publish, on a quarterly basis, anonymised 
summaries of complaints received, actions taken and 
penalties imposed, ensuring transparency and_ public 
accountability; and 


(c) publication, at least once every six months, of a 


Substitution 
of new 
section for 
section 24. 


Restrictions 
on 
advertisement 
and 
prohibition as 
to unfair trade 
practices. 


SEC. 2] 


4. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 161 


National Labelling Compliance Report containing summary 
statistics of inspections, samples analysed, violations detected, 
corrective actions taken and names of entities whose licences 
were suspended, blacklisted or products withdrawn; and 


(d) provision for coordination between the Food Authority, 
the State Food Safety Commissioners and consumer 
organisations for effective surveillance and citizen reporting of 
non-compliance. 


(8) The Food Authority or the Commissioner of Food Safety may, 
either on receipt of a complaint or swo motu, take cognizance of any 
instance of non-compliance with the packaging, labelling, nutritional 
disclosure or front-of-pack nutrition labelling requirements prescribed 
under this Act or the regulations made thereunder, and may initiate 
inquiry, inspection, or enforcement proceedings under this section 
without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under this Act 
or any other law for the time being in force.” 


For section 24 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“24. (1) No advertisement shall be made of any article of food which 
is misleading or deceiving or contravenes the provisions of this Act, 
the rules and regulations made thereunder. 


(2) No person shall engage in any unfair trade practice for the purpose 
of promoting the sale, supply, use and consumption of any article of 
food, or adopt any unfair or deceptive practice including the making 
of any statement, whether orally or in writing or by visible, audio- 
visual, electronic, social or digital representation, which— 


(a) falsely represents that the food is of a particular 
standard, quality, quantity, grade, composition or origin; or 


(b) makes a false or misleading representation concerning 
the need for, or the usefulness of, any food; or 


(c) gives to the public any guarantee, assurance or claim of 
efficacy, health benefit or disease-risk-reduction capability of 
any food that is not based on adequate or scientific justification: 
or 


Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that 
any guarantee, assurance or claim is based on adequate or 
scientific justification, the burden of proof of such defence shall 
lie on the person raising such defence. 


(d) conceals any material fact likely to mislead consumers 
as to the nature, substance or quality of the food; or 


(e) directly or indirectly promotes, encourages, or targets 
excessive or inappropriate consumption of foods high in fat, 
sugar or salt, particularly by children or other vulnerable 
persons; or 

(6? uses, in any manner, imagery, characters or 
endorsements likely to exploit consumer trust, emotional appeal 
or the impression of healthfulness, in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act, the rules and regulations made 
thereunder. 


(3) No advertisement, sponsorship, brand placement, product tie-in, or 
marketing communication relating to any food identified as high in 
fat, sugar or salt shall be— 


162 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(a) broadcast, telecast, streamed, exhibited or displayed 
during, immediately before or immediately after any 
programme, film, online content, or other communication 
primarily intended for persons below eighteen years of age; or 


(b) placed, exhibited, sold or distributed in any physical 
location or event primarily attended or accessed by children, 
including schools, playgrounds, childcare facilities, sports or 
cultural events, amusement parks, fairs, or similar gatherings; or 


(c) sponsored, co-branded or otherwise associated with 
educational, sporting or social-welfare activities involving 
children: 


Provided that every advertisement or promotional 
communication relating to such foods permitted under this Act, 
shall display, in the manner prescribed under section 23, a clear 
and legible health warning stating — 


“High sugar/salt/fat foods are injurious to health.” 


(4) Any contravention of sub-section (3) shall be punishable under 
section 53. 


(5) No person shall issue, participate in, or cause the publication, 
broadcast, promotion or dissemination of any advertisement relating to 
any article of food, whether in print, electronic, broadcast, digital, or 
social media, which is prohibited under sub-section (/), sub-section 
(2) or sub-section (3). 


(6) Every manufacturer, advertiser, advertising agency, publisher, 
marketing intermediary, influencer or endorser who causes or 
participates in the publication or promotion of a misleading 
advertisement shall be liable under this Act, and no person shall make 
or participate in any endorsement of any food without having 
exercised due diligence to verify the truthfulness of the representations 
made therein. 


(7) The Food Authority or the Commissioner of Food Safety may, 
after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard, by 
order— 


(a) direct the discontinuation, suspension or modification 
of any advertisement found to contravene the provisions of this 
section; 


(b) require the publication of a corrective advertisement, 
disclosure or clarification in such manner as may be specified; 


(c) initiate proceedings for penalty under section 53; and 


(d) in cases of repeated or grave contraventions, 
recommend suspension or cancellation of licence under section 
32. 


(8) The Food Authority shall establish and maintain a Digital 
Food Advertising Monitoring and Redressal System for real-time 
monitoring of electronic and social-media advertisements, receipt 
of consumer complaints, and publication of enforcement actions 
taken under this section. 


(9) The Food Authority or the Commissioner of Food Safety may, 
either on receipt of a complaint or swo motu, take cognizance of any 
advertisement, promotional material or digital content that appears to 
contravene the provisions of this section, and may initiate inquiry or 
proceedings under sub-section (7) without prejudice to any other 
action that may be taken under this Act or any other law for the time 
being in force. 


Amendment 
of section 27. 


Substitution 
of new 


section 
section 52. 


for 


SEC. 2] 


5. 


6. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 163 


(10) Any endorser or influencer who participates in the dissemination 
of a misleading or prohibited advertisement shall, in addition to any 
penalty imposed under section 53, be prohibited from making any 
endorsement in respect of any food for a period not exceeding one 
year for the first contravention and three years for any subsequent 
contravention. 


(1/1) The Food Authority may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, make regulations to— 


(a) specify standards and conditions for permissible claims, 
health or nutritional endorsements, and _ substantiation 
requirements; 


(b) classify and restrict advertisements and marketing 
communications for foods high in fat, sugar or salt, including 
through broadcast scheduling, placement and _ content 
restrictions; 


(c) prescribe guidelines for corrective or counter- 
advertising, monitoring mechanisms, influencer disclosures and 
coordination with consumer-protection or self-regulatory bodies; 
and 

(d) prescribe the form and periodicity of public disclosure 
of enforcement actions taken under this section. 


(12) Every audio-visual or television advertisement of foods identified 
as high in fat, sugar or salt, whether broadcast, telecast, streamed or 
exhibited in cinemas, shall— 


(a) display for not less than five seconds a static and 
legible health-warning message stating “High sugar/salt/fat 
foods are injurious to health” on the lower one-fifth of the 
screen; and 


(b) carry a simultaneous voice-over or caption conveying 
the same warning in the language of the advertisement. 


(13) The Central Government may, by notification, specify the 
manner, format and technical standards for the display and audibility 
of the health-warning message referred to in sub-section (/2).” 


In section 27 of the principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(1) The manufacturer, packer, importer, marketer, e-commerce food 
business operator, wholesaler, distributor or seller of an article of food 
shall be liable for such article of food if it does not meet the 
requirements of this Act and the rules and regulations made 
thereunder, and shall, jointly and severally— 


(a) ensure the accuracy and legibility of all information 
appearing on the package and on any digital or electronic display 
of such product; 


(b) in the case of online or electronic sale, ensure that 
complete and accurate label particulars, including nutritional 
information and health warnings, are displayed to the purchaser 
prior to the conclusion of the sale; and 

(c) ensure that the packaging and labelling of such food 
conform to the front-of-pack nutrition labelling and nutritional 
grade requirements prescribed under this Act.” 


For section 52 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


164 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


“52. (1) Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person 
on his behalf, manufactures for sale, stores, packs, sells, distributes, 
markets or imports any article of food for human consumption which 
is misbranded shall be liable— 


(a) for the first contravention, to a penalty which may 
extend to fifty lakh rupees; 


(b) for the second or subsequent contravention, to a penalty 
which may extend to one crore rupees and suspension of licence 
for a period up to six months; and 


(c) where such contravention has caused injury to public 
health, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, in addition to any penalty imposed under this section. 


(2) The Adjudicating Officer may, after giving the person concerned 
an opportunity of being heard, issue directions requiring— 


(a) corrective labelling or public disclosure; 
(b) withdrawal or recall of the food from the market; or 
(c) destruction of the food where correction is not feasible. 


(3) The penalties under this section shall be without prejudice to any 
action that may be taken under section 53 in respect of a misleading 
advertisement relating to such food.” 


For section 53 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“53. (1) Any person who, whether by himself or by any other person 
on his behalf, publishes, causes to be published, or is a party to the 
publication or dissemination of any advertisement which— 


(a) falsely describes any food; or 


(b) is likely to mislead as to the nature, substance, quality, 
composition, origin, nutritional or health attributes of any food; 
or 


(c) makes or endorses any claim or representation 
prohibited under sub-section (3) of section 24 or any other 
provision of this Act prohibiting such advertisement, shall be 
liable— 


(i) for the first contravention, to a penalty which may 
extend to fifty lakh rupees; 


(ii) for the second or subsequent contravention, to a 
penalty which may extend to one crore rupees; and 


(iii) where such contravention has caused injury to 
public health, to imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, in addition to any penalty imposed 
under this section. 


(2) In any proceeding, the fact that a label or advertisement relating to 
any article of food in respect of which the contravention is alleged to 
have been committed contained an accurate statement of the 
composition of the food shall not preclude the court from finding that 
the contravention was committed. 


(3) In the case of any advertisement or promotion of such food, the 
manufacturer, advertiser, and the advertising or digital platform, 
which knowingly facilitates or continues such publication after being 
notified by the Food Authority or the Commissioner of Food Safety, 


Penalty for 
misbranded 
food. 


Substitution of 
new section for 


section 53. 
Penalty for 
misleading or 
prohibited 
advertisemen.. 


Substitution 
of new 
section for 
section 55. 


Penalty for 
failure to 
comply with 
directions of 
the Food 
Safety 
Officer. 


SEC. 2] 


8. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 165 


shall be jointly and severally liable for the penalty specified under this 
Act. 


(4) The Food Authority shall issue guidelines for the identification of 
misleading or prohibited advertisements, corrective disclosures, and 
the gradation of penalties in proportion to the gravity of the 
contravention. 


(5) Any contravention of sub-section (3) of section 24 shall be deemed 
an offence under this section. 


(6) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (3) of section 
24, relating to the display of health warnings or the restriction of 
advertising and promotion of foods high in fat, sugar or salt, shall be 
liable— 


(a) for the first contravention, to a penalty which may 
extend to fifty lakh rupees; 


(b) for every subsequent contravention, to a penalty which 
may extend to two crore rupees and suspension of licence or 
advertising rights for a period up to one year; and 


(c) where the contravention involves targeting or 
influencing children, to imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years in addition to such monetary penalty.” 


For section 55 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“55.(1) If any food business operator, importer, manufacturer, 
advertiser, marketer, e-commerce food business operator, or any 
person subject to the provisions of this Act, without reasonable 
ground, fails to comply the requirements of this Act or the rules or 
regulations or orders issued thereunder, as directed by Food Safety 
Officer, he shall be liable— 


(a) for the first contravention, to a penalty which may 
extend to twenty lakh rupees; 


(b) for the second or subsequent contravention, to a penalty 
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees; and 


(c) where such non-compliance results in obstruction of 
inspection, sampling, recall, withdrawal, or other enforcement 
action, or causes risk of injury to public health, to imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year, in addition to such 
monetary penalty. 


(2) Where a person continues to fail to comply with such direction or 
order beyond the time specified therein, he shall be liable to an 
additional penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees for every day 
during which the failure continues, after conviction for the first such 
offence. 


(3) The penalties imposed under this section shall be without prejudice 
to any other action that may be taken under this Act for contravention 
of any specific provision or order.” 


166 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART Il— 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

The Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 provides the overarching legal 

framework for regulating the quality, safety, labelling and marketing of food in 

India. However, the rapid expansion of packaged foods, online retail, digital 

marketing and the rising burden of diet-related non-communicable diseases have 

created new challenges. Misleading labels, incomplete disclosures, deceptive 


health claims and aggressive promotion of foods high in fat, sugar and salt 
especially to children have highlighted significant regulatory gaps. 


In order to strengthen consumer protection and ensure transparent nutritional 
information, the Bill proposes a mandatory front-of-pack nutrition labelling system 
using an interpretive nutritional grade; clearer and more comprehensive criteria for 
misbranding and mislabelling; and stricter obligations on manufacturers, importers, 
marketers and e-commerce platforms to display accurate label particulars. The Bill 
further provides for a scientific advisory mechanism for nutrition standards, 
improved surveillance, a digital complaint monitoring platform, and time-bound 
enforcement processes. 


To curb misleading and harmful advertising practices, the Bill introduces a 
dedicated regime restricting advertisements of high-fat, high-sugar and high-salt 
foods, prohibits targeted marketing to children, mandates visible health warnings, 
and places liability on advertisers, digital platforms and influencers. Penalties for 
misbranding, mislabelling, misleading advertisements and non-compliance with 
enforcement directions are substantially enhanced, including provisions for 
imprisonment in cases of serious public-health impact. 


These amendments aim to modernise India’s food-labelling and advertising 
standards in line with global best practices, protect consumers from deceptive 
practices, and promote healthier dietary choices while ensuring fair and supportive 
compliance pathways for small food businesses. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


SWATI MALIWAL. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 167 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of a Scientific Advisory 
Committee on Nutritional Labelling, establishment or designation of a network of 
accredited laboratories and testing facilities in determining nutrient profiles and 
obtaining nutritional grades at cost-effective rates, framing schemes for capacity- 
building, technical assistance and awareness programmes to support compliance by 
small food business operators, creation of an online public complaint-redressal 
portal. Clause 4 provides for the establishment and maintenance of a Digital Food 
Advertising Monitoring and Redressal System for real-time monitoring of 
advertisements, receipt of consumer complaints and publication of enforcement 
actions. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring 
and non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is 
difficult, at this juncture, to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 


168 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. XIV of 2026 


A Bill to amend the Commission for Air Quality Management in the 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Commission for Air Quality Management in 
National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas (Amendment) Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 2. 


Substitution of 
new section for 
section 3. 


Constitution of 


Commission 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 169 


2. In section 2 of the Commission for Air Quality Management in National 
Capital Region and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as the 
principal Act), in sub-section (/),— 


(i) in clause (6) for the words “member who is co-opted under sub- 
section (3)”, the words “Member of Parliament nominated under sub- 
section (4)”’ shall be substituted; 


(ii) after clause (d), the following clauses shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(da) “Directorate” means the Technical and Enforcement 
Directorate constituted under section 11A; 


(db) “Fund” means the Clean Air Fund constituted under 
section 16;”. 


3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“३, (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute a body to be known as the Commission for Air Quality 
Management in National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas to exercise the 
powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions assigned to, that 
Commission under this Act. 


(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions 
of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and 
immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The Commission shall function as an autonomous statutory body in the 
discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers under this Act, and shall 
not be subject to the direction or control of the Central Government or any 
other executive authority, except as expressly provided in this Act. 


(4) The Commission shall consist of — 


(a) a full-time Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence in 
the field of public administration, environmental governance, air-quality 
management or urban and regional planning, with at least fifteen years 
of relevant experience; 


(b) five full-time technical Members possessing expertise 
respectively in the fields of— 


(i) air-quality science and environmental engineering; 
(ii) public health and epidemiology; 

(iii) agriculture and biomass management; 

(iv) urban transport and industrial transition; and 

(v) law, governance or environmental regulation; 


(c) the following persons as ex officio Members for institutional 
coordination: — 


(i) one representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, not below the rank of Secretary; 


(ii) the Chairperson of the Central Pollution Control Board or 
a Member nominated by that Board; 


(iii) one technical representative of the Indian Space 
Research Organisation; and 


(iv) the Chief Secretaries in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh; 


29 of 2021. 


170 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(d) three independent Members, to be appointed respectively from - 


(i) non-governmental or civil-society organizations, having at 
least ten years’ experience in the field of air-quality or 
environmental management; 


(ii) academic or research institutions of national repute; and 


(iii) industry or professional associations engaged in 
sustainable development or clean technology; 


(e)a full-time Member-Secretary, possessing not less than ten 
years’ experience in administration, finance or environmental 
management, who shall act as the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Commission and be responsible for the day-to-day administration and 
management of its staff and funds; 


(f) two Members of Parliament, one to be nominated by the 
Chairman of the Council of States from amongst Members of that 
Council representing the National Capital Territory of Delhi and one to 
be nominated by the Speaker of the House of the People from amongst 
Members of that House representing any of the parliamentary 
constituencies within the National Capital Territory of Delhi, to serve as 
Associate Members of the Commission for a term of two years: 


Provided that such Associate Members shall be entitled to participate in 
the meetings of the Commission but shall not have the right to vote. 


(5) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi, and the Central 
Government may by notification in the official Gazette, establish regional 
offices in such other parts of the National Capital Region and adjoining areas 
as the Commission may determine: 


Provided that the notification shall come into force only with effect from 
the date of its laying in both Houses of Parliament, and if laid on different 
dates, from the later date when it is so laid. 


For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“4, (1) The full-time Chairperson shall be appointed by the 
President, by warrant under his hand and seal: 


Provided that every appointment under this sub-section shall be 
made after obtaining the recommendation of a Selection Committee 
consisting of— 


(a) the Prime Minister of India— Chairperson; 
(b) the Speaker of the House of the People—Member; 


(c) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People— 
Member; and 


(d) the Chief Justice of India— Member 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, “the Leader of the 
Opposition in the House of the People” shall, when no such Leader has been 
so recognized, include the Leader of the single largest group in opposition of 
the Government in the House of the People. 


(2) The full-time Members, independent Members and _ the 
Member-Secretary of the Commission shall be appointed by the Central 
Government in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Central Government shall lay down a transparent 
procedure for inviting applications, short-listing and appointing the full- 


Substitution 


of 


new Section for 


Section 4. 


Appointment of 


Chairperson, 
Members 
Member- 
Secretary. 


and 


Substitution of 
new Section for 
section 5. 


Resignation 
and removal of 
Chairperson 
and Members. 


SEC. 2] 


5. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 171 


time Members and independent Members on the basis of integrity, 
professional competence and relevant experience. 


(4) No serving officer of the Government shall be appointed as a 
full-time Member of the Commission. 


(5) Every appointment made under this section shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.” 


For section 5 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“5, (1) The Chairperson, may, by notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the President of India, resign his office and such resignation 
shall take effect from the date on which it is accepted by the President. 


(2) The Chairperson shall not be removed from his office except 
by order of the President of India, made on the recommendation of the 
Selection Committee constituted under sub-section (३) of section 4, if 
the Chairperson :— 


(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 


(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an 
offence which in the opinion of President involves moral turpitude; 
or 


(c) is unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of 
mind or body; or 


(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions; or 


(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in 
office prejudicial to the public interest: 


Provided that the Chairperson shall not be removed under 
clause (e) unless he has been informed of the charges against him 
and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


(3) The President may, by order, suspend from office the 
Chairperson in respect of whom proceedings for removal have been 
initiated under this section, pending such proceedings. 


(4) The procedure for inquiry, and the terms and conditions of 
suspension or removal of the Chairperson, shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 


(5) A Member, other than an ex officio Member, may, by notice in 
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his 
office, and such resignation shall take effect from the date on which it is 
accepted by the Central Government. 


(6) The Central Government may remove any Member, other than 
an ex officio Member, from office, in such manner as may be prescribed, 
if such Member— 


(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or 


(b) engages during his term of office in any paid employment 
outside the duties of his office; or 


(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent 
court; or 


(d) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in 
office prejudicial to the public interest; or 


(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions; or 


172 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(f) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence 
which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral 
turpitude: 


Provided that no such Member shall be removed under clause 
(d) unless he has been informed of the charges against him and 
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.” 


6. For section 10 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, Substitution of 
namely:— new Section for 

y: section 10. 
“10. (४) The Commission shall meet at such time and place as the 
Chairperson may think fit: Mestings:’ . and 
procedure of the 


Provided that the Commission shall meet at least once every cok 


month, and a special meeting shall be convened within twenty-four 
hours if any part of the National Capital Region or any adjoining area 
records air quality in the ‘Severe’ or higher category for a continuous 
period of twenty-four consecutive hours, as notified by the Central 
Pollution Control Board or the concemed State Pollution Control Board. 


(2) The quorum for a meeting of the Commission shall be one-half 
of the total number of Members. 


(3) If any Member remains absent for more than two consecutive 
meetings without furnishing written reasons to the satisfaction of the 
Chairperson, such absence shall be recorded in the minutes, and the 
matter may be referred by the Chairperson to the Central Government 
for such action as may be deemed appropriate. 


(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the Commission shall have the power to lay down, by 
regulations, its own procedure. 


(5) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be 
authenticated by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the 
Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf. 


(6) The Commission may, by general or special order, subject to 
such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified therein, 
delegate to the Chairperson, full-time Member, the Member-Secretary or 
any Sub-Committee constituted under section 11, such of its powers 
under this Act (except the power to make regulations under section 26) 
as it may deem necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and 
improving the quality of the air in the National Capital Region and 
adjoining areas.” 


7. In section 11 of the principal Act,— Amendment _ of 
section 11. 


(i) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(SA) Every Sub-Committee constituted under this section 
shall— 


(a) meet at such intervals as may be determined by the 
Commission; and 


(b) place its minutes and recommendations before the 
Commission at its next meeting for consideration.” 


(ii) for sub-sections (7), (8) and (9), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely: 


“(7) The Commission shall, for the efficient discharge of 
its functions, create such number of posts in Groups ‘A’, ‘B’ 
and ‘C’, as existing under the Central Government, as it may 
consider necessary. 


Insertion of 
new section 
11A. 


Establishment 
of Directorate. 


SEC. 2] 


8. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 173 


(8) The regular posts so created under sub-section (7) 
shall be filled on deputation basis from amongst officers of the 
Central Government, State Governments or Union territory 
Administrations possessing such qualifications and experience 
as may be prescribed. 


(9) The short-term or project-based posts may be created 
and filled on contractual basis by the Commission for such 
period and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed 
in its regulations.” 


(iii) after sub-section (9), the following sub-sections shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


“(10) The Commission may, for the purpose of providing 
technical, research-based or field-level inputs in specific areas 
relating to its mandate, engage field experts, consultants or 
domain specialists, including field officers stationed in 
different regions of the country for on-site inspections, fact- 
finding and coordination with State Commissions and local 
authorities, for a period not exceeding one year, which may be 
extended for a further period on such terms and conditions as 
may be prescribed in its regulations. 


(11) The Commission may, for the effective implementation 
of its programmes and for undertaking studies, outreach, 
awareness or capacity-building activities, collaborate or enter into 
alrangements with non-governmental organisations, civil society 
groups, research institutions or professional associations working 
in the field of air quality management, environment protection, or 
sustainable development. 


(12) The officers, experts and other staff engaged or 
appointed under this section shall discharge their duties and 
functions under the general superintendence and control of the 
Chairperson. 


(13) The salaries, allowances and conditions of service of 
the officers, experts and other staff appointed or engaged 
under this section shall be such as may be prescribed.” 


In Chapter II, after section 11 of the principal Act, the following section shall 
be inserted, namely:— 


“11A. (1) The Commission may, by regulations, establish a 


Technical and Enforcement Directorate and such other Directorates 
or Divisions as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act. 


(2) The Directorate shall consist of such number of officers, 


technical experts, scientists and enforcement personnel as the 
Commission may determine, and may include officers on deputation 
from the Central Government, the Central Pollution Control Board, 
the State Pollution Control Boards, or other scientific or technical 
institutions. 


(3) The Directorate shall— 


(a) undertake inspection, monitoring and verification of 
compliance with directions, standards or measures issued under 
this Act; 


(b) assist the Commission in investigation and in the 
collection of evidence for the imposition of penalties or 
environmental compensation; 


14 of 1981. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(c) prepare technical and scientific assessments, emission 
inventories and enforcement reports; and 


(d) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by 
the Commission. 


(4) The Director-General or Head of the Directorate shall be 
appointed by the Commission in such manner and on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Commission may, by general or special order, authorise 
any officer of the Directorate to exercise such powers of entry, 
inspection, search, sampling or seizure as are exercisable by an officer of 
the Central Pollution Control Board under the Air (Prevention and 
Control of Pollution) Act, 1981, within the National Capital Region and 
adjoining areas, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the 
order: 


Provided that the exercise of powers under this sub-section shall be 
without prejudice to the powers and functions of the Central Pollution 
Control Board or the State Pollution Control Boards under the said Act.” 


In section 12 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in sub-section (2), for clause (xi), the following clause shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(xi) issue directions in writing to any person, officer, or authority, 
and such person, officer, or authority shall be bound to comply with 
such directions within the period specified by the Commission and to 
furnish a report of such compliance in such form as may be prescribed;” 


Explanation.— For avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that 
the power to issue directions under this section includes the power to 
direct— 


(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, 
operation or process; or 


(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water 
or any other service. 


(ii) in sub-section (2), after clause (xi), the following clauses shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(xii) where any person, body, or authority fails to comply with a 
lawful direction or order of the Commission, the Commission may, after 
giving such person, body, or authority an opportunity of being heard, 
impose such civil penalty as may be prescribed; 


(xiii) take cognizance, either swo motu or on a reference made by 
the Central Government, any State Government or any statutory 
authority, private entity, social organisation or individual of matters 
involving substantial questions of environmental importance or systemic 
failures in the implementation of laws, policies or directions relating to 
air quality management in the National Capital Region and adjoining 
areas, and take such measures or issue such directions as may be 
necessary to ensure compliance and accountability: 


Provided that for the purpose of inquiry into such matters, the 
Commission shall have the powers of a civil court while trying a suit 
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, in respect of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person 
and examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document, 
record or report; 


Amendment of 
section 12. 


SEC. 2] 
Substitution of 10. 
new Section for 
section 14. 


Penalty for 
contravention 
of provisions of 
Act, rules, 
orders or 
directions. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 175 


(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
office; and 


(e) issuing such interim or final directions as may be 
necessary to prevent, control or abate air pollution or to secure 
compliance with the provisions of this Act or any order made 
thereunder. 


Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that nothing in this clause shall be construed as 
empowering the Commission to entertain or adjudicate individual 
complaints or grievances until it has a larger public impact. 


(xiv) every order or direction issued by the Commission under 
clause (xiii) shall be deemed to be a decree of a civil court and shall be 
executable as such, and any wilful disobedience thereof shall be 
punishable in the manner provided under section 14 of this Act; 


(xv) maintain and publish, in such form and at such intervals as 
may be specified by regulations, data and information relating to air 
quality, directions issued and the status of compliance by the concerned 
authorities, and update such information on a monthly basis; 


(xvi) prepare and notify, within such period as may be prescribed, a 
five-year and ten-year Clean Air Action Target Plan for the National 
Capital Region and adjoining areas, setting time-bound quantitative 
targets for the reduction of particulate matter, PM2.s and PMhoo, and other 
key air pollutants, aligned with the National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards or such standards as may be prescribed, and specifying the 
roles, responsibilities and targets of the Governments of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and the States of Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan 
and Uttar Pradesh and other concerned authorities for achieving the 
same; 


(xvii) prepare an Annual Clean Air Implementation Plan consistent 
with the targets specified in the Clean Air Action Target Plans, 
identifying priority sectors and geographical areas, specific measures to 
be undertaken by each concerned authority, the estimated expenditure 
therefor, and the timelines for completion, and monitor and review its 
implementation.” 


(iii) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(5) In discharge of its functions, the Commission shall act 
independently and may, for purposes of policy coordination, consult the 
Central Government, and no executive direction inconsistent with the 
provisions or objectives of this Act shall be binding on the 
Commission.” 


For section 14 of the principal Act, the following section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“14, (1) Any person, body corporate or authority who contravenes 
any provision of this Act, or any rule, regulation, order or direction made 
or issued thereunder, shall be liable to— 


(a) in the case of a minor contravention, a penalty which may 
extend to fifty lakh rupees, and where such contravention is a 
continuing one, to an additional penalty which may extend to one 
lakh rupees for every day during which such contravention 
continues; 


(b) in the case of a major contravention likely to cause 
serious deterioration of air quality, a penalty which may extend to 


176 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


five crore rupees, and where such contravention is a continuing 
one, to an additional penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees 
for every day during which such contravention continues, or with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or both. 


(2) Where a local authority, department of Government or 
statutory body fails to comply with any lawful direction or order of the 
Commission, the Head of such authority or department shall be 
personally liable for such failure, unless he proves that the contravention 
occurred without his knowledge or that he had exercised due diligence to 
prevent such contravention. 


(3) The Commission may, by regulations, specify the classification 
of violations as minor or major having regard to their nature, extent and 
impact on air quality, and may adjudicate such violations and impose 
penalties after giving the person body corporate or authority concerned a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 


(4) The Commission shall maintain and publish, in such form and 
manner as may be prescribed, a record of all orders imposing penalties 
and the status of compliance thereof.” 


In section 16 of the principal Act,— 


(i) in the marginal heading, for the words “Grants by Central 
Government”, the words “Funding and Financial Autonomy of the 
Commission” shall be substituted; 


(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“(2) In addition to grants made under sub-section (1), there 
shall be constituted a non-lapsable fund to be called the Clean Air 
Fund, which shall be administered by the Commission in such 
manner as may be prescribed.” 


(iii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“(3) The Fund shall consist of— 


(a) sums realised by way of environmental 
compensation, penalties or fees under this Act; 


(b) grants, loans, donations or contributions made by 
the Central Government, any State Government, or any other 
body or person; and 


(c) funds received from research institutions or public— 
private partnerships, in accordance with such rules as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The Fund shall be applied to— 


(a) supporting projects, programmes and activities for 
improvement of air quality, including awareness, capacity- 
building and research; and 


(b) providing grants or assistance to State 
Governments, local bodies and other implementing agencies 
for carrying out time-bound measures for pollution-control 
and air-quality management.” 


In section 17 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “Accounts and audit”, 
the words “Accounts, audit and transparency” shall be substituted; 


(b) for sub-sections (2), (3) and (4), the following sub-sections 
shall be substituted, namely:— 


Amendment of 
section 16. 


Amendment of 
section 17. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 177 


“(2) The accounts of the Commission, including the Fund, 
shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
at such intervals as maybe specified by him. 


(3) The audit report, together with the certified accounts, 
shall be forwarded to the Central Government, which shall cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 


(4) The Commission shall, within six months after the close 
of every financial year, publish an annual financial and 
performance report indicating the receipts, disbursements and 
outcomes achieved through the utilisation of funds under this Act, 
and make such report available in the public domain.” 


Omission of 13. Section 20 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 

section 20. 

ee 14. ‘In section 25 of the principal Act, for sub-section (2), the following sub- 
section . 


section shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following 
matters, namely:— 


(a) the manner of appointment of full-time Members, 
independent Members and the Member-Secretary under sub- 
section (2) of section 4; 


(b) the procedure for inquiry, and the terms and conditions of 
suspension or removal of the Chairperson, under sub-section (4) of 
section 5; 


(c) the manner of removal of a Member under sub-section (6) 
of section 5; 


(d) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms 
and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members under 
sub-section (1) of section 8; 


(e) the allowance payable to the members, other than ex 
officio members of the Sub-Committees, under sub-section (6) of 
section 11; 


(f) the appointment of officers and other staff under sub- 
section (8) of section 11; 


(g) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the 
officers, experts and other staff under sub-section (/3) of section 
11; 


(h) the manner and terms and conditions of appointment of 
the Director-General or Head of the Technical and Enforcement 
Directorate under sub-section (4) of section 11A; 


(i) the manner of taking samples under clause (a) and the 
form of notice under sub-clause (7) of clause (2), of sub-section (4) 
of section 12; 


(j) the form and manner in which compliance reports shall be 
furnished under clause (xi) of sub-section (2) of section 12; 


(k) civil penalty to be imposed under clause (xii) of sub- 
section (2) of section 12; 


(1) the period within which Clean Air Action Target Plans be 
prepared and notified under clause (xvi) of sub-section (2) of 
section 12; 


(m) the form and manner of record of all orders imposing 


178 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


penalties and the status of compliance thereof under sub-section 
(4) of section 14; 


(n) the rate at which, and the manner in which, the 
environmental compensation shall be imposed and collected under 
section 15; 


(o) the sources of credit, administration and operation of the 
Clean Air Fund, under section 16; 


(p) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall 
be prepared under sub-section (/) of section 17; and 


(q) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed .” 


15. 1ा section 26 of the principal Act, for sub-sections (/) and (2), the following 
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the Commission may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the 
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the 
following matters, namely:— 


(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission under 
sub-section (4) of section 10; 


(b) the conditions and limitations subject to which power 
may be delegated by the Commission under sub-section (6) of 
section 10; 


(c) the members of each Sub-Committee under sub-sections 
(2), (3) and (4) of section 11; 


(d) period and terms and conditions of filling up short-term 
or project-based posts on contractual basis under sub-section (9) of 
section 11; 


(e) establishment of a Technical and Enforcement Directorate 
and other Directorates or Divisions under sub-section (/) of section 
11A; 


(f) form of maintenance of data and information relating to 
air quality, directions issued and the status of compliance by the 
concerned authorities and intervals at which it is to be published, 
under clause (xiv) of sub-section (2) of section 12; 


(g) the form and the manner of fumishing annual report 
under section 13; 


(h) the classification of violations as minor or major under 
sub-section (3) of section 14; 


(i) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by 
regulations.” 


Amendment of 
section 26. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 179 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Commission for Air Quality Management in the National Capital Region 
and Adjoining Areas Act, 2021 was enacted to provide an institutional framework for 
coordinated action on air pollution in the National Capital Region (NCR). However, 
recurring episodes of severe air pollution and persistent enforcement gaps have 
demonstrated the need to strengthen the Commission’s autonomy, institutional 
capacity and powers. 


It has therefore become necessary to amend the Act to— 


(a) reconstitute the Commission as an autonomous statutory body with a 
transparent and high-level selection mechanism; 


(b) include full-time domain experts, representatives of concerned States, 
independent members and Members of Parliament from Delhi/NCR to improve 
institutional coordination; 


(c) establish a Technical and Enforcement Directorate with powers of 
inspection, monitoring and compliance verification; 


(d) provide enhanced powers to issue binding directions and impose civil 
penalty; 


(e) mandate preparation of long-term Clean Air Action Target Plans and 
annual implementation plans with measurable pollution-reduction targets; and 


(f) ensure financial autonomy through a non-lapsable Clean Air Fund and 
statutory grants, along with greater transparency in publication of data, 
compliance status and fund utilisation. 


The amendments are intended to create a more effective, accountable and 
scientifically grounded mechanism to prevent, control and abate air pollution in Delhi 
NCR and adjoining areas, thereby safeguarding public health and environmental 
quality. 


Hence, this Bill. 
SWATI MALIWAL. 


180 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 7 of the Bill provides that the Commission shall create such number of 
posts in Groups ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ as it may consider necessary and for the salaries, 
allowances and conditions of service of the officers, experts and other staff so 
appointed. It also provides for engagement of technical, research-based or field-level 
inputs in specific areas relating to its mandate, engage field experts, consultants or 
domain specialists, including field officers stationed in different regions of the 
country for on-site inspections, fact-finding and coordination with State 
Commissions and local authorities. Clause 8 provides for establishment of a 
Technical and Enforcement Directorate and for required number of officers, technical 
experts, scientists and enforcement personnel. Clause 11 provides for constitution of 
non-lapsable Clean Air Fund to be administered by the Commission which shall 
consist of grants, loans, donations or contributions made by the Central Government, 
any State Government, or any other body or person. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult, at 
this juncture, to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 181 


XXxil 


Bill No. VIII of 2026 


A Bill to provide for the prohibition of casual online dating services that promote 
transient and superficial relationships, while promoting and regulating serious 
matrimonial services aligned with cultural and familial 
ethos of the country; to protect users, particularly 
women and youth, from exploitation, harassment, 
and social harms; to preserve family 
structures and national social 
fabric, and for matters 
connected therewith 
or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


CHAPTER I 

PRELIMINARY 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Online Matrimonial and Dating Services Short title and 
(Promotion and Regulation) Act, 2026. commencement: 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be 
appointed for different provisions of this Act: 


Provided that upon commencement of provisions relating to the 
prohibition of casual online dating services, a grace period of three 
months shall be provided for existing casual dating services to cease 
operations and migrate user data in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Definitions. 


Prohibition of 
casual dating 
services. 


Prohibition of 
advertisements 
and promotions. 


Prohibition on 
financial 
facilitation. 


Promotion of 
matrimonial 
services. 


Registration and 
regulation of 
matrimonial 
services. 


182 


2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) "Authority" means the Matrimonial Services Authority 
established under section 8; 


(b) "casual dating service" means any online platform, application 
or intermediary that primarily facilitates transient, superficial, or non- 
committal romantic or sexual encounters through features such as 
swipe-based matching, algorithmic promotion of short-term 
interactions, or lack of mandatory family or matrimonial intent 
verification; 


(c) "matrimonial service" means any online platform, application 
or intermediary focused on facilitating long-term marital alliances with 
emphasis on cultural, familial, religious, and compatibility-based 
matching, including verified family endorsements and marriage- 
oriented outcomes; 


(d) “online intermediary" means any platform offering dating or 
matrimonial services, as defined under clause (w) of section 2 of the 
Information Technology Act, 2000; 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(f) "user" means any person accessing, registering or availing 
services of a matrimonial service or casual dating service within the 
territory of India. 


Explanation.— The expressions used but not defined in this Act 
shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the 
Information Technology Act, 2000, as amended by this Act. 


CHAPTER II 
PROHIBITION OF CASUAL DATING SERVICES 


No person, intermediary, or entity shall offer, host, advertise, or facilitate 
any casual dating service in India, whether operated domestically or 
targeting users in the country from outside the territory. 


No person shall publish, display or disseminate any advertisement, 
endorsement, or promotional material for casual dating services through any 
medium, including digital platforms. 


No bank, financial institution, payment system operator or digital payment 
intermediary shall process any transactions related to casual dating services, 
including subscriptions or in-app purchases. 


CHAPTER III 
PROMOTION AND REGULATION OF MATRIMONIAL SERVICES 


The Central Government shall take such steps as it considers necessary to 
promote matrimonial services as constructive platforms, by — 


(a) providing integration with government digital portals; 


(b) launching public awareness campaigns on healthy matrimonial 
practices, digital literacy, and family harmony; and 


(c) recognising matrimonial services which comply with cultural 
ethos and user safety standards. 


(1) No matrimonial service shall operate in the country unless it is registered 
with the Authority established under section 8 in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


21 of 2000. 


21 of 2000. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 183 


(2) Every matrimonial service shall adhere to the guidelines on verified 
profiles, family involvement, anti-harassment measures, and data privacy, as 
may be prescribed. 


(3) Every matrimonial service shall provide for age-appropriate matching, 
cultural sensitivity, and grievance redressal, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an 
Authority to be known as the Matrimonial Services Authority to 
perform the functions assigned to it under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall consist of the following Members, to be appointed 
by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette, 
namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence, integrity 
and standing, having not less than twenty years’ experience in law, 
public administration, social policy, digital governance, or regulation of 
technology platforms; 


(b) one Member (Legal), who shall be a person qualified to be 
appointed as a Judge of a High Court or who has held the office of 
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, or possesses at least fifteen years’ experience in cyber law, 
constitutional law, or regulatory adjudication; 


(c) one Member (Technology and Digital Platforms), having at 
least fifteen years’ experience in information technology, platform 
governance, algorithmic accountability, data security or digital public 
infrastructure; 


(d) one Member (Women and Child Safety), drawn from persons 
having demonstrated experience of not less than fifteen years in the 
fields of women’s rights, child protection, social welfare, gender justice 
or victim support systems; 


(e) one Member (Sociology and Family Studies), being a 
recognised academic or practitioner with substantial experience in 
sociology, demography, family studies, or social psychology, with 
particular expertise in Indian social institutions; 


(f) one Member (Consumer Protection and Grievance Redressal), 
having experience in consumer law, public grievance mechanisms, or 
regulatory compliance and enforcement; 


(g) one Member ex-officio, not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology; and 


(h) one Member ex-officio, not below the rank of Joint Secretary 
to the Government of India, to be nominated by the Ministry of Women 
and Child Development. 


(3) The Chairperson and Members, other than ex-officio Members, shall 
hold office for a term of five years or until attaining the age of sixty-five 
years, whichever is earlier, and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one 
further term: 


Provided that no person shall be appointed as Chairperson or 
Member after attaining the age of sixty-two years. 


(4) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service including resignation by the Chairperson and 
members or removal from Office shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Establishment of 
Matrimonial 
Services 
Authority. 


184 


Functions and 
powers of the 
Authority. 


Power to block 
access. 


Investigation and 
search. 


Punishment 607 
offering casual 
dating services. 


Punishment 07 
advertisements. 


Punishment _ for 
financial 
facilitation. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(5) No Chairperson or Member shall, during their term of office or for a 
period of two years thereafter,— 


(a) hold any office of profit in, or 


(b) have any financial or managerial interest in any matrimonial 
service, online intermediary, or digital platform regulated under this 
Act: 


Provided that a declaration of assets and interests shall be 
made at the time of appointment and annually thereafter. 


(6) The quorum for a meeting of the Authority shall be one-half of the total 
number of Members, and decisions shall be taken by majority vote of the 
Members present and voting, and in the event of equality of votes, the 
Chairperson shall have a casting vote. 


(7) The Authority shall be assisted by a Secretariat consisting of officers 
and employees appointed by the Central Government, and the terms and 
conditions of their service shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(1) The Authority shall oversee registration, categorisation, and compliance 
of matrimonial services, issue codes of practice, and address public 
grievances and promote innovation in matrimonial services, and ensure 
alignment with familial values of the society. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing functions, the 
Authority shall have powers to — 


(a) register, suspend or cancel registration of casual dating and 
matrimonial services; 


(b) issue binding codes of practice, advisories and compliance 
directions; 


(c) conduct audits, inspections and inquiries; 


(d) adjudicate complaints and impose penalties in accordance with 
this Act; and 


(e) recommend policy measures to the Central Government. 
CHAPTER IV 
ENFORCEMENT 


The Central Government may, under section 69A of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000, as amended by this Act, direct blocking of access to 
any casual dating services. 


Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the 
time being in force, the Central Government may, by notification, authorize 
any officer or class of officers of the Central Government, Authority or 
State Government to exercise the power to investigate, search, seize, and 
arrest without warrant for offences under this Act, in accordance with the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 


CHAPTER V 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
Whoever offers or facilitates a casual dating service shall be punishable 


with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine 
which may extend to one crore rupees. 


Whoever advertises a casual dating service shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine 
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees. 


Whoever facilitates financial transactions for casual dating services shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years 
and with fine which may extend to one crore rupees. 


21 of 2000. 


46 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 185 


For subsequent convictions under sections 12, 13 and 14, imprisonment may 
extend to five years and fine to two crore rupees. 


All offences under this Act shall be cognisable and bailable. 


(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person who, 
at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of that part of the business of the company 
as well as the company, shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly. 


(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (/) shall render any such person liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly under this act, if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall hold an independent 
director or a non-executive director of a company who is not involved 
in the actual decision making, liable for such offence. 


Explanation.— for the purposes of this section, the expressions— 
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes— 
(i) a firm; and 


(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals 
whether incorporated or not; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to— 
(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm; 


(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, 
means any member controlling its affairs thereof. 


CHAPTER VI 
MISCELLANEOUS 


(1) The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority, 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The amounts levied under the Act for the following purposes shall be 
credited to the Authority— 


(a) registration fees payable by matrimonial services; 
(b) renewal fees and compliance-related charges; 

(c) fines imposed for contraventions under the Act; and 
(d) such other fees as may be prescribed by rules. 


(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India. 


Enhanced 
punishment for 
repeat offences. 


Offences to be 
cognisable and 
bailable. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Provision of 
funds. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual Report. 


Annual report and 
audit report to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 


Act to have 
overriding effect. 


Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 


Power to make 
tules. 


186 


20. 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act 
shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices 
of the Authority. 


(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Authority. 


The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account 
of its activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy 
thereof to the Central Government. 


The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in 
so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non- 
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to 
be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, before each House 
of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith in any other law for the time being in force. 


No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the 
Government or Authority or its members or its officers for actions taken in 
good faith in pursuance of this Act or of rules made thereunder. 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for promotion, registration, enforcement and to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 


(a) the form and manner of registration of matrimonial services 
with the Authority; 


(b) the eligibility conditions, verification protocols and 
compliance requirements for matrimonial services; 


(c) standards for user safety, grievance redressal, data protection, 
and prevention of harassment; 


(d) the fees payable for registration, renewal and other regulatory 
purposes; 

(e) the powers, functions and procedure to be followed by the 
Authority; 


(f) the manner of conducting inspections, audits and inquiries by 
the Authority; 


(g) the conditions subject to which exemptions, if any, may be 
granted; and 


(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed 
under the Act. 


21 of 2000. 


SEC. 2] 


25. 


26. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 187 


(3) Every rule made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may 
appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period 
of two years from the date of commencement of the Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


(1) In section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (/):— 


(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(fa) “casual dating service” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under clause (a) of section 2 of the Online 
Matrimonial and Dating Services (Promotion and Regulation) 
Act, 2026;”; 


(ii) after clause (y), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


«6 


(va) “matrimonial service” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it under clause (6) of section 2 of the Online 
Matrimonial and Dating Services (Promotion and Regulation) 
Act, 2026;”; 


(iii) after clause (20), the following clause shall be inserted, 
namely:— 


“(zba) “prohibited online dating intermediary” means any 
intermediary offering or facilitating a casual dating service as 
defined under the Online Matrimonial and Dating Services 
(Promotion and Regulation) Act, 2026;”. 


(2) In section 69A of the principal Act, in sub-section (J), after the words 
“or intermediary”, the words “including any prohibited online dating 
intermediary” shall be inserted. 


(3) After section 79A of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“79B. Liability of prohibited online dating intermediaries.— 


(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 79, no 
intermediary shall claim safe harbour protection under this section 
if it hosts, facilitates, or enables access to a casual dating service 
as defined under the Online Matrimonial and Dating Services 
(Promotion and Regulation) Act, 2026. 


(2) Any intermediary found in violation shall be liable for 
penalties under the said Act and shall forthwith cease operations 
within India.” 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


Amendments to 
the Information 
Technology Act, 
2000. 


188 


Savings for 
existing 
matrimonial 
services. 


Repeal and 
transitional 
provisions. 


27. Any intermediary operating as a matrimonial service existing on the date of 


28. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


commencement of this Act shall be deemed provisionally registered for a 
period of three months, within which it must obtain registration under 
section 7. 

All existing guidelines, circulars, or advisories issued by the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology or any authority in respect of 
online dating platforms inconsistent with this Act stand repealed from the 
date of commencement of this Act. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 189 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The rapid proliferation of online casual dating applications in India demands 
urgent intervention to protect the nation's familial ethos and social fabric. This Bill 
seeks to ban casual dating services while promoting regulated matrimonial 
platforms aligned with Indian values. 


2. The dating app sector is projected to reach $1.42 billion by 2030, with user 
numbers surging 293 per cent. from 20 million (2018) to 82.4 million (2023). 
Adoption is widespread, with 70 per cent. of users from tier-2/3 cities (e.g., Pune, 
Ahmedabad), where 54 per cent. reside and contribute 45 per cent. of revenues, 
clashing with traditional values by prioritising superficial, swipe-driven encounters 
over lasting commitments. 


3. These apps promote westernised fleeting relationships, undermining India's 
heritage of family, mutual respect, and collective well-being. A sociological study 
highlights erosion of familial ties coupled with urban isolation, emotional voids, 
and strained bonds from transient connections. 


4. Women face heightened risks of harassment, catfishing, stalking, and 
assault; 83 per cent. report online abuse (one in three weekly). A Delhi case 
involved a 30-year-old woman raped and defrauded of rupees twenty two lakh via 
a dating app, deterring justice due to stigma. 


5. Gender imbalance (70 per cent. male users)leads to heightened competition, 
emotional vulnerability and susceptibility to manipulation; This structural 
imbalance has been systematically exploited by organised criminal networks which 
deploy fabricated profiles to induce users into fraudulent engagements. 


6. Apps foster non-marital intimate partnerships linked to depression, low self- 
esteem, and commodification of worth; a Jaipur study found 33.3 per cent. of youth 
struggling with meaningful relationships. Patriarchal norms amplify harassment, 
leading to withdrawal. NCRB data shows less than 29.6 per cent. cybercrime 
conviction rates, strained by underreporting and probes. 


7. Transient relationships weaken family structures, exposing children to 
mental health risks like anxiety and depression. Western parallels show adolescents 
from single-parent families exhibit more behavioral issues and lower life quality, a 
cautionary trend for India where stable units are vital for resilient generations. 


8. Blind adoption of Silicon Valley's individualism risks rising divorce rates 
and youth alienation, as seen in Western societies. India must prioritise dharma, 
harmony, and community over fleeting models. 


9. In conclusion, regulation is insufficient; an outright ban on casual dating 
services is imperative to shield youth, preserve families, and reaffirm cultural 
ethos, while promoting matrimonial alternatives fosters a value-aligned digital 
ecosystem. 


Hence, this Bill. 


FAUZIA KHAN. 


190 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 8 of the Bill provides for the establishment of Matrimonial Services 
Authority, its composition including appointment of Chairperson, Members, 
officers and employees of the Authority, their salaries and allowances. These 
expenses shall be met from the Consolidated Fund of India, to the extent such 
expenditure is not otherwise met by the Authority through fees or fines levied 
under the Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is 
difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 191 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. 


Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to issue orders, by 
notification, for removing difficulties in giving effect to the provisions of the Act 
for a period of two years from the commencement thereof. 


As the rules or orders will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of 
legislative power is of a normal character. 


192 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


XXII 


Bill No. X of 2026 


A Bill to provide for the establishment of a National Authority 
and State Authorities for regulating quality standards, licensing, 
inspection, current good manufacturing practices 
compliance, and safe manufacture, storage, 
distribution, and use of medical gases, 
and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy- seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Medical Gases (Quality, Safety and Short title and 
Regulation) Act, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 193 


Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the National Appellate Medical Gases 
Tribunal established under section 18; 


(b) “Fund” means the Medical Gases Regulation Fund established 
under section 20; 


(c) “manufacturing practices” means current good manufacturing 
practices applicable to medical gases, including requirements relating to 
quality systems, production and process controls, testing and quality 
assurance, personnel qualifications, premises and facilities, equipment design, 
calibration, cleaning and maintenance, distribution controls and record- 
keeping, and as may be prescribed; 


(६) “medical gas” means any drug which is manufactured, processed or 
stored in a liquefied, non-liquefied, or cryogenic state and is administered to 
human beings as a gas for therapeutic, diagnostic or prophylactic purposes, 
and includes the following designated medical gases, namely:— 


(i) oxygen, 
(ii) nitrogen; 
(iii) nitrous oxide; 
(iv) carbon dioxide; 
(v) helium; 
(vi) carbon monoxide; and 
(vii)medical air; 
as recognized in any official pharmacopeia for the time being in force; 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this Act, the expression “medical 
gas” shall not include gases used solely as excipients in drug products which 
are not medical gases, gases used merely as processing aids, or gases which 
do not qualify as drugs under any law for the time being in force. 


(e) “medical gas producer” means any person engaged in the 
manufacture, processing, filling, refilling, transfilling, packing, repacking, 
storage, or distribution of medical gases; 


(f) “National Authority” means the National Medical Gases Regulatory 
Authority established under section 4; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(h) “regulations” means regulations made by the National Authority 
under this Act; 


(i) “State Authority” means a State or Union territory Medical Gases 
Regulatory Authority that may be established in every State and Union 
territory under section 10. 


ae : 3. The provisions of this Act shall be construed and applied with a view to 
eae 5 ae ensuring that the quality and safety of medical gases are maintained so as to 
and protect human life, particularly in critical care, neonatal care, emergency 
application. medicine, anaesthesia and during public health emergencies. 
CHAPTER II 
NATIONAL MEDICAL GASES REGULATORY AUTHORITY 

Establishment 4. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
Sat establish an Authority to be known as the National Medical Gases 

: Regulatory Authority to perform the functions assigned to it under this 
Authority. 


Act. 


(2) The National Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold, and dispose of 


194 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said 
name, sue or be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the National Authority shall be at such place in the 
country as the Central Government may, by notification, specify. 


(4) The National Authority shall function as the apex scientific and regulatory 
body for medical gases in the country and shall exercise such powers and 
perform such functions as are assigned to it under this Act. 


(1) The National Authority shall consist of the following, namely:— 


(a) a Chairperson, being a person of eminence in medical 
gases, pharmaceutical sciences, chemical engineering, biomedical 
engineering, or public health regulation; 


Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, a person shall be 
deemed to be a person of eminence in medical gases if he has demonstrated 
outstanding expertise or experience in the manufacture, regulation, clinical 
use or safety management of medical gases. 


(b) a Vice-Chairperson, possessing special knowledge and 
professional experience in regulatory science or industrial gas 
safety; 


(c) five full-time Members, to be appointed from amongst 
persons having proven expertise in— 


(6) medical gas manufacturing and manufacturing 
practices compliance, 


(ii) analytical chemistry and quality assurance, 
(iii) clinical use of medical gases or anesthesiology, 


(iv) industrial safety and pressure systems engineering, 
and 


(v) regulatory affairs or public administration; 
(d) three ex-officio Members, namely— 
() the Drugs Controller General of India; 


(ii) a representative not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary from the Union Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare; and 


(iii) a representative not below the rank of Joint 
Secretary from the Union Ministry of Commerce and Industry 
or the Union Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers; 


(e) two part-time Members representing academic or research 
institutions, to be nominated by the Central Government. 


(2) The composition of the Authority shall ensure adequate representation of 
scientific, technical, clinical and regulatory expertise. 


(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Members, other than the ex- 
officio Members, shall be appointed by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of a Search-cum-Selection Committee constituted for the 
purpose in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(1) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and the full-time Members shall hold 
office for a term not exceeding four years from the date on which they enter 
upon their office, and shall be eligible for re-appointment for one further term. 


(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and 
Members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


Composition of 
the National 
Authority. 


Term of office and 
conditions of 
service of the 
Chairperson and 
Members of the 
National Authority. 


Powers and 
functions of 
the National 
Authority. 


Promotion of 
research and 
capacity 
building. 


Officers and 
other 
employees of 
the National 
Authority. 


Establishment 
of State 
Authority. 


7. 


10. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 195 


(1) The National Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:— 


(a) specify national standards for the quality and safety of medical 
gases; 


(b) specify regulatory norms based on manufacturing practices for 
the manufacture, processing, filling, equipment control, testing, 
labelling, and distribution of medical gases; 


(c) accredit laboratories for testing of medical gases, including 
tests for purity, identity, humidity, contamination, and composition; 


(d) conduct or cause to be conducted scientific inspections and 
audits of medical gas production facilities; 


(e) maintain a national registry of licensed medical gas 
producers; 


(f) coordinate with State Authorities in matters relating to 
compliance, enforcement, investigation and recall of medical gases; and 


(g) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it under 
this Act or as may be prescribed. 


(2) The National Authority may, for the efficient discharge of its functions and 
in furtherance of the objects of this Act, issue directions consistent with the 
provisions of this Act to any State Authority, manufacturer, licensee, or 
accredited laboratory. 


The National Authority may promote and facilitate research and capacity 
building in relation to medical gases, including research on: 


(a) causes and prevention of contamination; 

(b) technologies for humidity control; 

(c) mitigation of risks relating to fungal infections; 

(६) development of emergency oxygen surge capacity; and 
(e) safe blending, storage and handling practices. 


(1) The Central Government shall provide the National Authority with 
such officers and other employees, as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of its functions under this Act. 


(2) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, and 
the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other 
employees, so appointed for the purposes of the National Authority shall 
be such as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER III 


STATE MEDICAL GASES REGULATORY AUTHORITIES 


(1) There shall be established in every State and Union territory, by the 
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, a body 
to be known as the (name of the State or Union territory) Medical 
Gases Regulatory Authority for the purposes of this Act. 


(2) The State Authority shall exercise such powers and perform such 
functions as are conferred upon it under this Act, including— 


(a) grant, renewal, suspension and cancellation of licences; 


(b) inspection and surveillance of compliance with manufacturing 
practices; 

(c) investigation of accidents and safety incidents relating to 
medical gases; 


5 of 1908. 


196 


11. 


12. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(d) monitoring of consumer and patient safety; and 
(e) institution of prosecutions for offences under this Act. 


(3) The State Authority shall exercise its powers and discharge its functions 
within the State, subject to such standards, guidelines and coordination 
mechanisms as may be specified by the National Authority under this Act. 


(4) The composition of the State Authority, the qualifications and 
experience, term of office, salary and allowances of the Chairperson and 
Members of the State Authority as well as the regulation of its procedure 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the respective State Government. 


(5) The State Authority shall, while inquiring into any matter referred to it 
under this Act, have the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit and, in particular, in respect of the 
following, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 


(d) requisitioning any public record or document or copy thereof 
from any court or office; 


(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and/or 
documents; and 


(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
CHAPTER IV 
LICENSING AND MANUFACTURING PRACTICES COMPLIANCE 


(1) No person shall manufacture, process, fill, refill, transfill, store, distribute Licensing 
or supply any medical gas except under and in accordance with a licence mpage 
issued by the State Authority subject to payment of such fees and in such 

manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) A licence granted under sub-section (/) shall be valid for a period of one 
year and shall be renewable in such manner and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed, including— 


(a) compliance with manufacturing practices requirements; 


(b) compliance with requirements of inspection of facilities, 
equipment, personnel, and record systems; and 


(c) demonstration of adequate quality systems. 


(3) The fees payable for the grant or renewal of a licence shall be such as may 
be prescribed and shall be credited to the Fund constituted under section 20. 


(1) Every licensed medical gas producer shall comply with the manufacturing Manufacturing 


practices applicable to medical gases, as may be prescribed. पक 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (/), such manufacturing 
practices may provide for requirements relating to— 


(a) organisation and personnel, including requirements relating to 
adequate qualifications, training, experience and periodic refresher 
training in manufacturing practices, conducted by competent persons, to 
ensure that personnel remain conversant with applicable requirements; 


(b) buildings and facilities, including requirements relating to 
adequate space, hygienic design, protection against contamination, 


producers. 


of 
gas 


for 


medical gases. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 197 


physical segregation to prevent mix-ups, cleanable surfaces and 
appropriate environmental controls; 


(c) equipment, including requirements relating to appropriate 
design, capacity and placement, periodic maintenance, calibration and 
cleaning, use of non-reactive materials, and documented procedures for 
inspection, cleaning and maintenance; 


(d) production and process controls to ensure the identity, strength, 
quality, purity and correct filling of medical gases, including validated 
procedures for evacuation of containers, controlled filling, leak detection 
and pressure-temperature safety checks; 


(e) laboratory controls, including testing for identity, strength, 
impurities, contaminants, and humidity, validation of test methods, 
calibration of instruments and maintenance of records; and 


(f) packaging, labelling and distribution controls, including colour 
coding, prevention of mix-ups, distribution traceability and recall 
mechanisms. 


CHAPTER V 
INSPECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 


Powers of 13. (1) The State Authority, or any officer authorised by it in this behalf, may, in 
82400 such manner as may be prescribed, inspect— 


(a) any premises where medical gases are manufactured, processed, 
filled, refilled, transfilled or stored; 


(b) filling stations and related facilities; 


(c) records, including electronic or computerised records, relating to 
the manufacture, testing, storage or distribution of medical gases; 


(d) testing laboratories engaged in the analysis of medical gases; and 


(e) containers, closure systems, manifolds, hoses, gauges and any 
other equipment that comes into contact with medical gases. 


(2) An officer authorised under sub-section (/) may, for the purposes of this 
Act— 


(a) take samples of any medical gas for testing or analysis; 


(b) seal or seize any stock of medical gases found to be unsafe, 
contaminated or non-compliant with the provisions of this Act or the rules 
made thereunder; 


(c) order the immediate stoppage of manufacture, filling or 
distribution, where such activity poses a risk to public health or safety; 
and 


(d) recommend to the competent authority the suspension or 
cancellation of a licence, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Offences and 14. (J) Any person who manufactures, processes, fills, refills, transfills, stores, 

एशाभा1९5. distributes or supplies any medical gas which does not conform to the 
standards specified under this Act or the rules made thereunder shall be guilty 
of an offence. 


(2) Whoever commits an offence under sub-section (/) shall be punishable— 


(a) for the first offence, with fine which may extend to twenty-five 
lakh rupees; 


198 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(b) for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to 
one crore rupees, or with both; and 


(c) with suspension, cancellation or non-renewal of the licence, in 
such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) Where the manufacture or supply of any sub-standard, contaminated, 
moisture-laden or fungus-conducive medical gas or gas mixture results in, or 
is likely to result in, injury to health or death of any patient, such offence shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, 
and with fine. 


(4) Any person who— 
(a) wilfully contravenes manufacturing practices; 


(b) falsifies, alters or suppresses records required to be 
maintained under this Act; or 


c) mislabels or tampers with containers or cylinders of medical 
Pp 
gases, 


shall be deemed to have committed a cognizable offence punishable under 
sub-section (3). 


(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of that part of the business of the 
company as well as the company, shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any 
such person liable to any punishment provided under this Act, if he proves 
that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section— 


(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 


(1) Every medical gas producer shall, in such manner and within such time as 
may be prescribed, report to the appropriate Authority any occurrence of— 


(a) contamination or suspected contamination of medical gases; 
(b) breach of prescribed humidity or moisture limits; 


(c) failure or malfunction of equipment used in the manufacture, 
filling or storage of medical gases; 


(d) leakage, filling defect or other defect affecting the integrity or 
safety of containers; or 


(e) any adverse event or serious risk to health associated with the 
use of medical gases. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Mandatory 
reporting of 
incidents. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 199 


(2) The obligation under sub-section (४) shall apply irrespective of whether 
such occurrence results in actual harm. 


Recall of 17. Where any batch of medical gas is found to be unsafe or sub-standard, the 
aan sub- State Authority, may, in such manner as may be prescribed, direct the 
iiedical manufacturer or any other person responsible, to forthwith recall such batch 
gases. from the market, at his own cost. 

CHAPTER VI 


APPELLATE TRIBUNAL 


Establishment 18. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Appellate 


ae Tribunal to be known as the National Appellate Medical Gases Tribunal. 


(2) The composition of the Appellate Tribunal, the qualifications and 
experience, term of office, salary and allowances of the Chairperson and 
Members of the Appellate Tribunal as well as the regulation of its 
procedure shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(3) Any medical gas producer aggrieved by an order of suspension or 
cancellation of licence, or imposition of penalty, passed by the National 
Authority or a State Authority under this Act, may prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Tribunal within such period and in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall, after giving the parties to the appeal a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as it thinks fit, 
within such time as may be prescribed. 


CHAPTER VII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 


Grants by 19. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
eae? Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Authority and the 
Government. : ‘ 3 
State Authority for a Union territory, by way of grants such sums of 
money as the Central Government may think fit for being utlilised for 
the purposes of this Act. 


Constitution 20. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 

oan notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
constituted for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called the Medical 
Gases Regulation Fund, and there shall be credited thereto— 


(a) fees received for the grant or renewal of licences under this 
Act; 


(b) penalties realised under this Act; 
(c) grants or loans made by the Central Government; and 


(d) voluntary contributions, donations or other receipts, 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenditure incurred in the 
discharge of the functions under this Act, including— 


(a) strengthening of regulatory and inspection mechanisms; 
(b) establishment and accreditation of laboratories; 

(c) training and capacity-building of personnel; and 

(d) preparedness and response to medical gas emergencies. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered by the National Authority in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


200 


21. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(4) The accounts of the Fund shall be audited by such auditor as may be 
prescribed every three months and the audit report shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 


(1) The National Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the National Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
National Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the National Authority under 
this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally 
has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, 
shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the National Authority. 


(4) The accounts of the National Authority, as certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the National Authority and the Central Government 
shall cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, 
before each House of Parliament. 


(1) The National Authority shall prepare every year, in such form and within 
such time as may be prescribed by the Central Government, an annual report 
giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government, which shall 
cause it, as soon as may be after its receipt, to be laid before each House of 
Parliament. 


(2) The State Authority shall, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, 
submit annual reports to the Central Government and to the respective State 
Government, as the case may be on matters within its jurisdiction: 


Provided that the Central Government shall cause such report received by it, 
as soon as may be after its receipt, to be laid before each House of Parliament: 


Provided further that the State Government, shall cause such report, as soon 
as may be after its receipt, to be laid before both Houses of the State 
Legislature, where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature 
consists of one House, before that House. 


The State Government shall, after due, appropriation made by Legislature by 
law in this behalf, pay to the State Authority for that State by way of grants 
such sums of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised 
for the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The State Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case 
may be, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the State Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
State Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


Accounts and 
Audit of the 
National 
Authority. 


Annual Reports. 


Grants by State 
Government. 


Accounts and 
Audit of State 
Authority. 


SEC. 2] 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make rules. 


25. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions. 


26. 


Power of 
National 
Authority to 
make 
regulations. 


27. 


Power of 
State 
Government 
to make rules. 


28. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him 
in connection with the audit of the accounts of the State Authority under this 
Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection 
with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in 
connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall 
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 
vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the State Authority. 


(4) The accounts of the State Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together 
with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case may be, by the State 
Authority and the audit report shall be caused to be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is received, before the Houses of Parliament or the State Legislature. 


CHAPTER VIII 


MISCELLANEOUS 
(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


(1) The Central Government may issue directions to the National Authority 
or any State Authority as it considers necessary in the public interest, 
particularly during pandemics or disasters and such Authority shall be bound 
to comply with such directions. 


(2) If any question arises as to whether any direction relates to a matter of 
policy involving public interest, the decision of the Central Government 
thereon shall be final. 


(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the 
National Authority may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification, make regulations to carry out the provisions of 
this Act. 


(2) Every regulation made by the National Authority under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the 
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity 
of anything previously done under that regulation. 


(1) The State Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out the 
provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature 


201 


202 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one 
House, before that House. 


29. The existing medical gas producers shall comply with the provisions of this Transitional 
Act within two years of the commencement of this Act. ५40७5 

30. The provisions of this Act shall have over riding effect notwithstanding Act to have 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being Gverndine ettect 
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this 
Act. 

31. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the ae remove 

ifficulties. 


Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear 
to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two 
years from the date of commencement of the Act. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 203 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Medical gases such as Oxygen, Nitrogen, Nitrous Oxide, Carbon Dioxide, 
Helium, Carbon Monoxide, and Medical Air are critical life-supporting drugs essential 
for surgical, emergency, and intensive care. Their quality, purity, humidity levels, and 
absence of contaminants are directly linked to human life and medical outcomes. 
During the second wave of COVID-19, numerous cases emerged where medical 
oxygen containing high humidity and impurities resulted in fungal infections, 
including mucormycosis, leading to tragic loss of eyes, ears, and even life. These 
incidents highlighted the urgent necessity for strict scientific regulation, real-time 
inspections, and Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) enforcement across 
the entire spectrum of medical gas production and distribution. 


Presently, there is no unified national scientific authority dedicated to 
monitoring medical gas quality across states. This Bill seeks to establish a National 
Scientific Authority and State Authorities to regulate quality standards, enforce 
CGMP, inspect facilities, license producers annually, impose penalties for substandard 
quality, and protect patient safety. This Bill further recognizes that medical gases are 
essential medicines whose quality standards must never be compromised, especially 
during pandemics or emergencies. 


Hence, this Bill. 
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 


204 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Medical Gases 
Regulatory Authority, Clause 5 for its composition, and Clause 6 and 9 provide for the 
salaries and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of services of the members, 
officers and other staff of the National Authority. Clause 7 provides for maintaining a 
national registry of licensed medical gas producers by the National Authority. Clause 18 
provides for the establishment of the National Appellate Medical Gases Tribunal. Clause 
19 provides that the Central Government shall provide grants to the Authority for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act and Clause 20 provides for establishment of the Medical Gases 
Regulation Fund. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve both non-recurring and recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult 
to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 25 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 27 empowers the National Authority to make 
regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 31 provides that the Central 
Government may make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for removing any 
difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules, regulations, orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative details only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


205 


206 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


XXIV 


Bill No. XII of 2026 


A Bill to provide for mandatory verification of antecedents of every 
delivery personnel employed by delivery platforms or other employers 
to ensure safety of consumers, maintenance of a mandatory 
register of delivery personnel, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 


India as follows: — 


Short title and 
commencement. 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Delivery Platforms (Verification of 
Antecedents of Delivery Personnel) Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Mandatory 
verification of 
antecedents 

of delivery 
personnel. 


Fees. 


Register of 
Delivery 
Personnel. 


SEC. 2] 


2. 


4. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) "delivery personnel" means any person engaged, whether as an 
employee, gig worker, contract worker, part-time worker, agent or 
independent partner, for the purpose of delivering goods or services to 
customers; 


(b) "delivery platform" or "employer" means any company 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013 or any limited liability 
partnership registered under the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 
or any other body corporate, partnership, association of persons or 
digital intermediary including any logistics company, food delivery 
platform, grocery delivery platform, courier agency or any commercial 
entity, which owns, operates, manages or facilitates delivery services 
including through electronic or digital means and engages delivery 
personnel for the purpose of delivering goods or services to customers; 


(c) "verification of antecedents" means the process of verification 
of identity, antecedents, past criminal record, and background check 
carried out through such authorities or systems, including jurisdictional 
police authorities, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(d) "Register" means a Register of Delivery Personnel maintained 
by the employer as provided in section 5; and 


(e) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules under this Act. 


(1) No delivery platform or employer shall engage, appoint, deploy or permit 
engagement of any person as delivery personnel unless such person has, prior 
to such engagement, appointment or deployment under gone verification of 
antecedents and obtained a satisfactory certificate, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made there under. 


(2) Every delivery platform or employer shall, within a period of three months 
from the date of commencement of this Act, ensure that all delivery personnel 
engaged by it on the date of such commencement, have undergone verification 
of antecedents and obtained a satisfactory certificate, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made there under. 


(3) The certificate of verification of antecedents obtained under sub-sections 
(1) and (2), shall remain valid for a period of two years from the date of its 
issuance: 


Provided that such certificate shall be got renewed by the delivery 
platform or employer before its expiry, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(4) No delivery platform or employer shall permit any delivery personnel 
whose certificate of verification of antecedents has expired or has not been 
renewed in accordance with provisions of sub-section (3), to engage in 
delivery of any goods or services. 


(1) The entire cost of verification of antecedents under this Act shall be borne 


by the delivery platform or employer, and shall not under any circumstances, 
be recovered, directly or indirectly, from the delivery personnel. 


(2) The Central Government may prescribe a uniform fee payable for 
verification of antecedents under this Act, in all States and Union territories. 


(1) Every delivery platform or employer shall maintain a Register of Delivery 
Personnel in such manner and in such form, as may be prescribed, containing 
the following particulars in respect of each delivery personnel: 


(a) full name; 


(b) Aadhaar number or such other approved identification number 
as may be prescribed; 


(c) permanent and current address; 


207 


208 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


(d) recent photograph; 
(e) certificate of verification of antecedents and its validity; 


(f) nature of engagement, whether engaged as employee, partner, 
gig worker, or otherwise; 


(g) date of joining and particulars of termination or resignation; 
and 


(h) such other particulars as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Register shall be maintained electronically and shall be made 
available, on demand, for inspection, to authorised police officers or such 
government officials as may be authorised for the purpose. 


Every delivery platform or employer shall— 


(a) ensure that any person who has not undergone verification of 
antecedents as provided in section 3, is permitted to deliver goods or 
services; 


(b) maintain accurate and up-to-date records of all delivery 
personnel in the Register; 


(c) immediately report to the concerned police authority, if any 
delivery personnel is found or suspected to be involved in suspicious or 
criminal or unlawful activity; 


(d) produce and display proof of compliance with verification of 
antecedents requirements when called upon during inspections; and 


(e) comply with such other conditions or requirements as may be 
prescribed. 


(1) Any delivery platform or employer who engages or permits the 
engagement of delivery personnel without a satisfactory certificate of 
verification of antecedents shall be liable to a penalty which shall amount to 
not less than rupees twenty-five thousand but not exceeding rupees one lakh 
for each such violation. 


(2) For subsequent and repeated offences, the digital platform or employer 
shall be liable to suspension of licence or temporary prohibition from 
operating delivery services, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of and was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as 
well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 


person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (7), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section— 


(a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or 
other association of individuals; and 


Duties 
delivery 


of 


platforms or 


employers. 


Penalties. 


Offences 
companies. 


by 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


Protection of 9, 
data. 

Power to 10. 
make rules. 

Overriding 11. 
effect. 

Power to 12. 
remove 

difficulties. 


(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 


All records collected or maintained for the purpose of verification of 
antecedents under this Act, shall be utilized solely for ensuring safety and law- 
enforcement purposes and shall be handled in accordance with privacy and 
data-protection laws for the time being in force. 


The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act, including but not limited to 
digital verification systems, prescription of uniform forms, fees and reporting 
procedures, and integration with national crime and identity databases. 


The provisions of this Act shall take effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


209 


210 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 

In recent years, India has witnessed a rapid growth of e-commerce, food 
delivery, courier services, and last-mile logistics, resulting in millions of delivery 
personnel visiting residential and commercial premises daily. Alongside these 
developments, several incidents of crime, theft, assault, impersonation, and misuse 
of delivery uniforms have been reported, posing serious threats to public safety. At 
present, there is no uniform national law mandating pre-employment and periodic 
verification of antecedents of delivery personnel. Many delivery platforms operate 
without adequate background checks of delivery personnel. Delivery personnel 
frequently change companies, cities, and identities, making their traceability 
difficult. Given the increasing security risk, it is necessary to institute a compulsory, 
standardized, and renewable verification of antecedents system which ensures that 
only verified delivery personnel are permitted to visit homes for delivery of goods or 
services. 


This Bill, therefore, seeks to: 
¢ make pre-employment verification of antecedents mandatory; 
* mandate renewal of such verification; 
¢ impose liability upon employers to bear the cost of verification; 


¢ require delivery platforms and employers to maintain a Register of 
Delivery Personnel, accessible for law-enforcement; 


* prescribe penalties for non-compliance; and 


eenhance safety of citizens, particularly senior citizens, women, and 
children. 


The Bill is in the public interest and essential for ensuring safety in the rapidly 
expanding delivery ecosystem. 


Hence, this Bill. 
AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 211 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 10 provides that Central Government may make rules for carrying out 
the purposes of this Bill. Clause 12 empowers the Central Government to make such 
provisions for removing any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Bill. 


As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, delegation of legislative 
powers is of a normal character. 


212 


1. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


XXV 


Bill No. XIII of 2026 


A Bill to provide for a comprehensive, scientific and patient-centric 
statutory framework for the ethical, safe and disciplined use of Artificial 
Intelligence in human health, clinical research and medical education; to enable 
Government and private hospitals, research institutions and medical colleges to 
utilize Artificial Intelligence to enhance patient care, prescription safety, 
clinical trials, drug discovery and medical education under strict 
human oversight; to ensure patient safety, data protection, 
accountability and transparency, to establish a statutory 
regulatory authority for the purpose and for 
matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
(1) This Act may be called the Artificial Intelligence (Human Health and 
Medical Education) Regulation Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Application of 
the Act. 


Disciplined 
and _patient- 
centric use of 
Artificial 
Intelligence in 
human health, 
clinical 
research and 
medical 
education. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 213 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Artificial Intelligence" means any computational system that 
uses algorithms, models, or rule-based techniques to analyse data or 
information and produce outcomes or actions, and which may operate 
with varying degrees of autonomy, adaptiveness, or human oversight; 


(b) “Artificial Intelligence system” means any machine-based 
system that, for explicit or implicit objectives, infers from input data to 
generate outputs such as predictions, recommendations or analyses 
influencing diagnosis, prescription review, treatment, clinical research, 
patient management or medical education; 


(c) “Authority” means the National Authority for Artificial 
Intelligence in Human Health and Medical Education established under 
section 13; 


(d) “Fund” means the Artificial Intelligence Harm Compensation 
Fund established under section 17; 


(e) “high-risk Artificial Intelligence system” means an Artificial 
Intelligence system whose failure, misuse or error may result in death, 
serious bodily injury, psychological harm, unethical experimentation, 
discrimination or grave clinical, research or educational consequences; 


69 “Human-in-the-Loop” means a governance mechanism ensuring 
meaningful human oversight, intervention and final responsibility over 
the outputs of an Artificial Intelligence system; 


(g) “medical education” includes undergraduate, postgraduate and 
super-specialty medical education, faculty development, assessment, 
certification and continuing professional development; and 


(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 


3. This Act shall apply to all Artificial Intelligence systems developed, 
deployed, imported, sold or used in India for — 


(a) diagnostics, screening, treatment, prognosis and clinical 
decision support; 

(b) prescription review, medication safety analysis and clinical 
audit; 


(c) drug discovery, therapeutics and biomedical research involving 
human data; 


(d) clinical trials, including protocol design support, patient 
eligibility assessment, safety monitoring and data analysis, subject to 
applicable laws and ethical approvals; 


(e) mental and behavioural healthcare; 
(f) public health surveillance and epidemiology; 
(g) hospital and clinic management systems; and 


(h) medical education, training, simulation, assessment and 
certification. 


4. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this regard in any other law for the 
time being in force, the use of Artificial Intelligence in human health, clinical 
research and medical education shall be:- 


(i) strictly as a supportive scientific tool intended to enhance, and 
not replace, human clinical judgment, ethical reasoning, compassion and 
professional accountability; and 


(ii) permitted only in a regulated, supervised and disciplined 
manner, as provided under this Act recognising that human life, dignity 
and safety are paramount. 


214 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(2) The Central Government may encourage innovation in such use of artificial 
intelligence, in such manner as may be prescribed, subject to protection of 
patient safety, research ethics, student competence or professional 
responsibility. 


(1) Subject to the provisions of section 4, any Government or private hospital 
or any other healthcare institution may utilise any Artificial Intelligence system 
to enhance diagnosis, treatment planning, patient monitoring, prescription 
review, clinical audit, quality assurance, public health functions and 
operational efficiency, subject to human oversight and informed consent, in 
such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that Artificial Intelligence systems may be utilised for 
prescription and clinical audit purposes, including detection of medication 
errors, drug—drug interactions, contraindications, dosage deviations and non- 
compliance with standard treatment guidelines, only as clinical decision- 
support tools. 


(2) No Artificial Intelligence system shall be deployed to autonomously 
generate, modify or finalise any prescription, and the final responsibility for a 
prescription shall at all times vest with a registered medical practitioner. 


(3) The Artificial Intelligence system may suggest evidence-based treatment 
protocols, care pathways and risk stratification models subject to the final 
decision regarding diagnosis, initiation, modification or discontinuation of 
treatment being vested exclusively with a registered medical practitioner, who 
shall remain professionally and legally accountable. 


(4) The Artificial Intelligence system may assist in clinical documentation, 
discharge summaries and follow-up planning, subject to verification and 
authentication by a human clinician. 


No Artificial Intelligence system shall operate as the sole or final authority in 
diagnosis, prescription, treatment, prognosis, patient triage or clinical decision- 
making; and the final authority and accountability shall at all times vest with a 
qualified human medical professional. 


(/) Any Government or private medical college or any other medical education 
institution may utilise Artificial Intelligence systems to supplement teaching, 
clinical simulations, curriculum planning, faculty support, assessment 
analytics and continuing medical education: 


Provided that such use shall not replace hands-on clinical training, 
bedside teaching, clinical reasoning or ethical judgment. 


(2) Artificial Intelligence systems may be used to analyse learning outcomes, 
identify competency gaps and suggest modifications or updates to medical 
syllabi, curricula and training methods, in alignment with emerging scientific 
evidence and national health priorities, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no Artificial Intelligence 
system shall be used to replace faculty judgment, certify clinical competence 
autonomously or dilute ethical and clinical training standards. 


(2) Any syllabus or curriculum modification suggested with the aid of 
Artificial Intelligence shall be advisory in nature and shall be implemented 
only after due human review, expert deliberation and approval by the National 
Medical Commission or such other competent authority in such manner as may 
be prescribed. 


(1) Any Artificial Intelligence system may be utilized to assist in drug 
discovery, molecule screening, protocol design, patient recruitment support, 
safety signal detection and data analysis in clinical trials, subject to compliance 
with any applicable law for the time being in force or ethical guidelines and 
regulatory approvals, as may be prescribed: 


Permissible use 
of Artificial 
Intelligence 
system in 
healthcare 
institutions. 


Mandatory 
human-in-the- 
loop. 


Permissible use 
of Artificial 
Intelligence 
system in 
medical 
education 
institutions. 


Safeguards in 
medical 
education. 


Permissible use 
of Artificial 
Intelligence 
system in 
clinical 
research. 


Safety, 
validation and 
monitoring. 


Informed 
consent. 


Data 
governance. 


Establishment 
of National 
Authority for 
Artificial 

Intelligence in 
Human Health 
and Medical 
Education. 


SEC. 2] 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 215 


Provided that all decisions relating to clinical trials shall remain under 
the control and responsibility of qualified investigators and such ethics 
committees, as may be appointed or constituted by the Central Government. 


(2) No Artificial Intelligence system shall independently determine trial 
participation, dose escalation, adverse event management or trial termination. 


(3) The use of any Artificial Intelligence system in clinical trials shall be 
transparent, auditable and subject to continuous oversight to prevent bias, 
unsafe experimentation or violation of participant rights, in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


Every Artificial Intelligence system covered under this Act shall undergo 
scientific validation in clinical, research or educational settings of the country 
and shall be subject to continuous post-deployment monitoring, bias 
assessment and performance review, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


Explicit, informed and Artificial Intelligence-specific consent shall be 
mandatory for the use of any Artificial Intelligence system involving 
identifiable human health, clinical trial or educational data, in such manner as 
may be prescribed: 


Provided that refusal to provide such content shall not, in any 
circumstance, result in denial of healthcare services or educational 
opportunities. 


The collection, storage, processing and sharing of data by means of any 
Artificial Intelligence system shall be limited to necessity, and any 
unauthorised re-identification, profiling or secondary use of such data without 
consent shall be prohibited. 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish an authority, to be known as the National Authority for Artificial 
Intelligence in Human Health and Medical Education, consisting of a 
Chairperson and such number of other Members to assist it in performing 
any of the functions under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, 
having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued. 


(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and it may with 
the prior approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other 
places in the country as it may deem necessary for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 


(4) The Authority shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 
(5) The Central Government may prescribe the following, namely:- 
(a) appointment of the Chairperson; 
(b) composition and qualification for appointment of Members; 


(c) salary, allowances payable to Chairperson and Members 
and their term of office; 


(d) disqualification for appointment and continuation as 
Chairperson and Members; 


(e) resignation by Members and filling of vacancy; 
(f proceedings of the Authority; 
(g) officers and employees of the Authority; 


(h) powers to be exercised by the Chairperson; and 


216 


14. 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(0) any other matter to further the objectives of this Act. 


The Authority shall be the central regulatory, supervisory and enforcement 
body for Artificial Intelligence systems governed under this Act and shall 
exercise the following powers and functions:- 


(a) to register, scrutinise and approve Artificial Intelligence 
systems intended for development, deployment, import, sale or use in 
human health, clinical research and medical education, in such manner 
as may be prescribed; 


(b) to classify Artificial Intelligence systems, including 
identification and designation of high-risk Artificial Intelligence 
systems, based on potential harm, complexity, autonomy and impact on 
human safety, ethics or rights; 


(c) to recommend to the Central Government regarding the 
conditions, limitations or safeguards that may be prescribed for approval, 
deployment or continued operation of Artificial Intelligence systems; 


(४) to formulate technical, ethical, clinical and educational 
standards for the safe, transparent and accountable use of Artificial 
Intelligence systems; 


(e) to require pre-deployment scientific validation of Artificial 
Intelligence systems in the clinical, research or educational settings of 
the country; 


(f) to mandate and oversee continuous post-deployment 
monitoring, performance review and bias assessment; 


(g) to order suspension, modification, recall or withdrawal of 
Artificial Intelligence systems found to be unsafe, unethical, misleading 
or non-compliant. 


(h) to investigate complaints, incidents, adverse events or whistle- 
blower disclosures relating to Artificial Intelligence systems. 


(i) to impose penalties for minor, serious or grave violations in 
accordance with section 15 of the Act; 


@ to establish and maintain a national registry of approved 
Artificial Intelligence systems, including their risk classification and 
permitted uses; 


(k) to administer and manage the Artificial Intelligence Harm 
Compensation Fund established under section 17; 


(9 to advise the Central Government on policy, legislative and 
regulatory measures relating to Artificial Intelligence in health and 
medical education; and 


(m) to perform such other functions, as may be prescribed. 


(1) Any person who contravenes or violates any provision of this Act shall be 
guilty of an offence and shall be liable for a fine of upto rupees ten lakh which 
may extend upto rupees five crore for violations of grave nature. 


(2) Whoever, causes death either directly or indirectly due to violation of any 
provisions of this Act shall be liable for imprisonment for a term which may 
extend up to seven years or a fine up to rupees ten crore or both. 


(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of and was 
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as 
well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Powers and 
functions of the 
Authority. 
Penalties. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Establishment 
of Artificial 
Intelligence 
Harm 
Compensation 
Fund. 


Whistleblower 
protection. 


Power to make 
10165. 


Overriding 
effect. 


SEC. 2] 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 217 


Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such 
person liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the 
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (J), where an offence 
under this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer 
shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of this section- 


(a) "company" means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other 
association of individuals; and 


(b) "director" in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm. 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish a fund to be called the Artificial Intelligence Harm 
Compensation Fund. 


(2) The Fund shall be credited with— 


(a) such sums as may be provided by the Central 
Government; 


(b) contributions, fees, or levies imposed on developers, 
deployers, or operators of Artificial Intelligence systems, in such 
manner as may be prescribed; 


(c) penalties recovered under this Act; and 


(d) any other source as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


(3) The Fund shall be administered by the Authority, subject to rules 
made by the Central Government in this behalf. 


(4) Every victim of harm caused by use of Artificial Intelligence systems 
shall be entitled to receive compensation from the Fund, in such manner 
as may be prescribed. 


No person who, in good faith, reports or discloses any violation of the 
provisions of this Act, shall suffer retaliation, discrimination, or adverse action 
of any kind; and such person shall be entitled to protection in such manner as 
may be prescribed. 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule or both the Houses agree that the rule 
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force. 


218 


21. 


22. 


23 


24. 


25. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority, by way of grants 
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under this Act shall 
have the same rights and privileges and the authority in connection with such 
audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with 
the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other 
documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Authority; 


(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the 
audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by 
the Authority. 


The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its 
activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the 
Central Government. 


The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, in so 
far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the non- 
acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit report to be 
laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, before each House of 
Parliament. 


If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to 
be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


Central 
Government to 
provide funds. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


Annual Report. 


Annual _ report 
and audit report 
to be laid before 
Parliament. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 219 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Artificial Intelligence has emerged as a transformative scientific tool with 
significant potential to enhance diagnostic accuracy, treatment planning, prescription 
safety, patient monitoring, public health surveillance, clinical research, drug 
development and the quality of medical education. Government and private hospitals, 
research institutions and medical colleges across India are increasingly adopting AI- 
based systems to support clinical decision-making, optimise healthcare delivery, 
conduct clinical audits, improve prescription safety and strengthen teaching—learning 
processes. At the same time, it is now well recognised that the application of Artificial 
Intelligence in human health, clinical trials and medical education is fundamentally 
different from its use in other sectors, as it directly affects human life, bodily integrity, 
mental health, dignity, autonomy, research ethics and professional medical judgment. 
Errors, bias, opacity, lack of validation or excessive reliance on automated systems 
may result in serious patient harm, misdiagnosis, unsafe prescriptions, unethical 
experimentation, erosion of clinical reasoning, dilution of professional accountability 
and long-term risks to public trust in the healthcare system. 


The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), as the apex body for biomedical 
research in the country, has issued detailed ethical and scientific guidance emphasising 
that Artificial Intelligence in healthcare and clinical research must adhere to the highest 
standards of safety, validation, transparency, accountability, data protection and 
human oversight, and must function strictly as a supportive tool rather than a substitute 
for human clinical judgment. Similarly, the National Medical Commission is mandated 
to ensure that medical education in India produces doctors who are clinically 
competent, ethically grounded and professionally accountable, which requires that 
Artificial Intelligence be used in medical education only in a supervised, 
supplementary and disciplined manner, without replacing hands-on training, ethical 
reasoning or faculty judgment. 


At present, however, India lacks a comprehensive statutory framework specifically 
governing the use of Artificial Intelligence in human health, clinical trials and medical 
education. Existing laws relating to information technology, data protection, drugs, 
clinical research or professional regulation are fragmented and do not adequately 
address the unique scientific, ethical, safety and liability issues posed by AI systems 
that influence diagnosis, prescriptions, treatment decisions, clinical trials or medical 
training. Ethical guidelines, though valuable, remain advisory in nature and do not 
provide enforceable safeguards, accountability mechanisms or effective remedies for 
harm. 


This Bill seeks to fill this critical regulatory gap by establishing a balanced, 
science-based and patient-centric statutory framework for the use of Artificial 
Intelligence in human health, clinical research and medical education. The Bill aims 
to— 


(a) enable the responsible use of Artificial Intelligence by Government and 
private hospitals, research institutions and medical colleges to enhance patient 
care, prescription safety, clinical research and medical education; 


(b) mandate strict human-in-the-loop oversight, ensuring that final 
authority and accountability for diagnosis, prescription, treatment decisions, 
clinical trial conduct and educational certification always rest with qualified 
medical professionals and educators; 


(c) ensure patient safety and risk minimization through scientific 
validation, bias assessment, transparency, continuous monitoring and post- 
deployment surveillance of Artificial Intelligence systems; 


(६) protect patient autonomy, dignity and data privacy, including 
mandatory informed consent for the use of Artificial Intelligence involving 
human health, clinical trial or educational data; 


(e) safeguard the integrity of medical education by preventing the 
replacement of clinical reasoning, hands-on training and ethical judgment with 


220 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


automated systems, while permitting advisory use of Artificial Intelligence for 
curriculum and syllabus development subject to statutory approval; 


(f) provide a regulated framework for the use of Artificial Intelligence in 
drug discovery and clinical trials, including protocol design support, safety 
monitoring and data analysis, subject to human oversight, ethics committee 
approval and existing clinical trial laws, ensuring that innovation does not 
compromise participant safety or research ethics; 


(g) establish clear accountability and liability, including penalties and 
compensation mechanisms, for harm caused by misuse, negligence or failure of 
Artificial Intelligence systems; and 


(h) create a statutory regulatory authority to oversee registration, approval, 
audit and enforcement in respect of Artificial Intelligence systems used in human 
health, clinical research and medical education. 


The Bill does not seek to stifle innovation. On the contrary, it seeks to foster 
responsible and trustworthy innovation by providing legal certainty, public confidence 
and robust patient protection, while making it unequivocally clear that human life, 
dignity, safety, ethics and professional responsibility are paramount and non- 
negotiable. The enactment of this legislation is therefore considered necessary in the 
national interest to ensure that Artificial Intelligence strengthens healthcare, clinical 
research and medical education in India as a scientifically sound and ethically 
governed aid, and not as an unregulated force capable of causing unintended harm to 
patients, students and society at large. 


Hence, this Bill. 


AJEET MADHAVRAO GOPCHADE. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 221 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National Authority for 
Artificial Intelligence in Human Health and Medical Education and appointment of 
Chairperson, Members and staff for its efficient discharge of functions. Clause 14, 
sub-clause (k) provides for establishment and maintenance of a national registry of 
approved artificial Intelligence systems. Clause 17 provides for establishment of an 
Artificial Intelligence Harm Compensation Fund. Clause 21 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide adequate funds to the Authority for carry out the purposes 
of this Act. 


This Bill, therefore, if enacted would involve recurring and non-recurring 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is 
difficult to estimate the actual expenditure likely to be involved. 


222 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of the Act. Clause 25 empowers the Central Government to make such 
provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might arise in giving effect 
to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules will relate to matters of procedural and administrative detail only, the 
delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 223 


XXVI 
Bill No. XV of 2026 


A Bill further to amend the Constitution of India. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: — 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Constitution (Amendment) Act, 2026. Short title and 
commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


224 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Amendment 2. In article 15 of the Constitution, for clause (4), the following new clause 
eramclet) shall be substituted: — 


“(4) Nothing in this article or in clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent 
the State from making any special provision for the advancement of any 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens proportionate to their 
population in the caste census or for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes.” 

Amendment 3. In article 16 of the Constitution, for clauses (4) & (4A), the following new 
of article 16. i 
clauses shall be substituted, namely:— 


“(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any 
backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of State, is not adequately 
represented in the services under the State proportionate to their population 
in the caste census. 


(4A) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any 
provision for reservation in matters of promotion, with consequential 
seniority, to any class or classes of posts in the services under the State in 
favour of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes which, in the opinion of the State, are not adequately represented in 
the services under the State.” 


Amendment 4. In article 124 of the Constitution, after clause (24), the following new 
48238 clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(2B) Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution, the appointment 
of Judges to the Supreme Court shall be made by giving due representation 
to members of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward 
Classes, religious minorities and women, in proportion to their population in 
the country: 


Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
categories which are already represented in the total strength of Judges of the 
Supreme Court in proportion to their population in the country. 


(2C) Subject to the provisions of clause (2B), the Central Government 
shall frame a Memorandum of Procedure for appointment of Judges of the 
Supreme Court in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, setting out the 
timelines and procedure including identifying, assessing, recommending, and 
appointing suitable candidates as Judges of the Supreme Court. 


(2D) If the Chief Justice or Judge of any High Court is being 
considered for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court, the Central 
Government shall consult the Government of that State before making such 
appointment. 


(2E) The Central Government shall either return or notify any 
recommendation of the collegium of the Supreme Court for appointment of 
Judges of the Supreme Court within sixty days of receipt of the 
recommendation: 


Provided that if any recommendation is returned by the Central 
Government and the same is re-iterated by the collegium of the Supreme 
Court, the Central Government shall notify the same within a period of thirty 
days of receipt of the reiteration. 


Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, ‘collegium of the 
Supreme Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising of five senior-most 
Judges of the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice of India.” 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 225 


5. For article 130 of the Constitution, the following article shall be Substitution of 
substituted, namely:— article 130. 
“130. (1) The Supreme Court established under Clause (1) of article 124 Constitution 
shall comprise of a Constitution Bench sitting at New Delhi and four Sa 
Permanent Regional Benches for the northern, southern, eastern and Regional 
western regions, which shall sit at New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata and Benches of the 
Mumbai respectively. Supreme Court. 


(2) The Constitution Bench at New Delhi shall hear only cases which are 
of constitutional importance. 


Explanation— The Chief Justice of India shall have exclusive 
power to determine which case is to be classified as a case of 
constitutional importance. 


(3) The four Permanent Regional Benches of the Supreme Court shall 
exercise the full jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of India, except over 
cases to be heard by the Constitution Bench. 


(4) The territorial jurisdiction of the Permanent Regional Benches of the 
Supreme Court shall be as follows:— 


(a) the northern Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at 
New Delhi shall deal with all cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand, Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and 
the Union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Delhi and 
Chandigarh; 


(b) the southern Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at 
Chennai shall deal with all cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of Tamil Nadu, 
Kerala, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and the Union 
territories of Puducherry and Lakshadweep; 


(c) the eastern Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at 
Kolkata shall deal with all cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of West Bengal, Bihar, 
Odisha, Jharkhand, Assam, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Union 
territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands; and 


(d) the western Regional Bench of the Supreme Court at 
Mumbai shall deal with all cases, except cases to be heard by the 
Constitution Bench, arising out of the States of Maharashtra, 
Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Goa and Union territory 
of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu: 


Provided that the Chief Justice of India may, if in the 
interest of administration of justice, transfer any case 
pending before any Permanent Regional Bench to any other 
Permanent Regional Bench or the Constitution Bench: 


Provided further that when cases involving the same 
substantial question of law or the same subject matter are 
pending before two or more Regional Benches, the Chief 
Justice of India may direct that all such cases be heard by any 
one of the Regional Benches. 


(5) The Chief Justice of India shall nominate Judges of the Supreme 
Court to sit at the Constitution Bench and the Permanent Regional 
Benches: 


Provided that Chief Justice of India shall nominate not less 
than six Judges of Supreme Court in each of the Permanent 
Regional Benches: 


226 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Provided further that while nominating Judges to the 
Permanent Regional Benches, the Chief Justice shall give 
preference to Judges whose parent High Court or erstwhile place 
of practice or residence prior to appointment as Judge, is within 
the territorial jurisdiction of that Permanent Regional Bench: 


Provided also that nothing contained herein shall prevent the 
Chief Justice from nominating any Judge of the Supreme Court to 
the Constitution Bench or any of the Permanent Regional Benches 
on the basis of seniority, or if it is otherwise necessary to do so in 
the interest of administration of justice.” 


Amendment 6. Inarticle 217 of the Constitution— 
of article 217. 


(J) in clause (J), for the words “sixty-two years”, the words 
“sixty-five years” shall be substituted. 


(2) after clause (2), the following new clauses shall be inserted, 
namely :— 


“(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, 
the appointment of Judges to the High Court of a State shall be made 
by giving due representation to members of the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, religious minorities and 
women, in proportion to their population within that State: 


Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
categories which are already represented in the total strength of Judges 
of a High Court in proportion to their population within that State. 


(2B) In all cases of appointments to a High Court of a State, the 
Central Government, the collegium of the Supreme Court and the 
collegium of that High Court shall take into consideration the opinion 
of the Government of that State before making the appointment. 


Explanation— For the purpose of this clause, ‘State’ includes all 
States and Union Territories that share a common High Court. 


(2C) Subject to the provisions of clause (2A), the Central 
Government shall frame a Memorandum of Procedure for appointment 
of Judges of High Courts in consultation with all the State 
Governments, Governments of Union Territories, the Chief Justice of 
India and Chief Justices of all High Courts, setting out the timelines 
and procedure including identifying, assessing, recommending, and 
appointing suitable candidates as Judges of High Courts. 


(2D) The Central Government shall either return or notify any 
recommendation of the collegium of the Supreme Court for 
appointment of Judges of the High Court within sixty days of receipt of 
the recommendation: 


Provided that if any recommendation is returned by the Central 
Government and the same is reiterated by the Supreme Court, the 
Central Government shall notify the same within a period of thirty days 
of receipt of the reiteration. 


Explanation— For the purpose of article 217, ‘collegium of 
Supreme Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising the five senior 
most Judges of the Supreme Court including the Chief Justice of India 
and ‘collegium of High Court’ shall mean a Committee comprising the 
three senior most Judges of that High Court including the Chief Justice 
of that High Court.” 


SEC. 2] 


7. 


8. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 227 


In article 224 of the Constitution— 


(1) after clause (J), the following new clause shall be inserted, 
namely :— 


“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Constitution, 
the appointment of additional Judges to the High Court of a State shall 
be made, by giving due representation to members of the Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other Backward Classes, religious 
minorities and women, in proportion to their population within that 
State: 


Provided that the provisions of this clause shall not apply to such 
categories which are already represented in the total strength of Judges 
and additional Judges of a High Court in proportion to their population 
within that State.” 


(2) in clause (3), for the words “sixty-two years”, the words 
“sixty-five years” shall be substituted. 


In the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution: — 


(a) In List 1 - Union List, Entry 69 shall be omitted; 


(b) In List का — Concurrent List, after Entry 47, the following 
entry shall be inserted, namely: — 


“48, Census” 


Amendment of 
article 224. 


Amendment of 
the Seventh 
Schedule. 


228 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Indian Constitution is the supreme law of this country which guarantees 
equality of status and opportunity. However, unequal cannot be treated equally and 
therefore the Indian Constitution allows for positive discrimination to foster 
equality. The origins of the reservation system may be traced back to India's old 
discriminatory caste system. With the object of making Indian society a democratic 
and egalitarian society, the framers of our Constitution framed the policy of 
reservation so that the oppressed and depressed classes can be joined in the 
mainstream. The reservations, therefore, were the exception to the general rule. 
Reservations in education and public employment are granted to elevate those 
regarded socially and educationally backward in the State's perspective or when a 
class of citizens is not properly represented in the services supplied by the State. 
Reservation is being offered to the citizens of India belonging to Scheduled 
Caste/Scheduled Tribe/Other Backward Classes (SCs/STs/OBCs) categories, who 
have been disadvantaged and exploited socially and educationally for generations. 


The Mandal Commission Report published in the year 1980 was the first to 
define reservation for Other Backward Classes of citizens in India. The living 
standards of the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and Backward Class families 
were deemed much poorer than the mainstream population, including Hindu 
forward castes and other religious groups. Therefore, the Mandal Commission 
recommended to grant 27% reservations to Other Backward Class citizens. 


Over the years, there has been unrest amongst the citizens belonging to the 
socially and educationally backward classes for not being treated fairly and equally 
and that there is no level playing field when compared to the socially and 
educationally forward citizens. The concept of reservations introduced to uplift the 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens for the injustice being done 
to them generation after generation did not achieve any greater results due to 
disparity in the quantum of reservations compared to their population. The fact 
remains that the reservation at 27% offered to the Other Backward Classes of 
citizens on the basis of the 1931 census over a period of time is not sufficient that 
too for a community, which is the largest in population in this country. The 
accumulation of the deficit in honouring their due representations and reservations 
for socially and educationally backward classes of citizens each year, again brings 
out inequality in the society. 


Constitution being an organic document should stretch itself to take care of 
the demand and needs of the society. The founding fathers of our Constitution have 
designedly couched Articles 14, 15 and 16 in comprehensive phraseology so that 
the frail and emaciated section of the people living in poverty, rearing in obscurity, 
possessing no wealth or influence, having no education, much less higher 
education and suffering from social repression and oppression should not be denied 
of equality before law and equal protection of the laws and equal opportunity in the 
matters of public employment or subjected to any prohibition or discrimination on 
grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. For achieving these objects, 
provisions were inserted under Articles 15 and 16 for providing reservations to the 
SC, ST and Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens. 


The Mandal Commission while determining the criteria for defining the 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens identified that the OBCs 
constituted nearly 52% of the Indian population on the basis of the 1931 census. 
That after considering all facts and circumstances, the Commission initially 
recommended for reserving 52% of all posts under the Central Government and in 
educational institutions both under the Central and State Governments, for the 
backward classes of citizens. It was due to the legal constraint of 50% cap on all 
reservations that initially the quantum of Other Backward Class reservation was 
fixed at 27%, in order to arrive at a figure which when added to the 22.5% 
reservation for SCs and STs remains below 50%. The reservation of 27% in 
education was introduced after the 937 Constitutional amendment with effect from 
20.1.2006. The twenty years of implementation of reservation in education has not 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 229 


enabled the entire socially and educationally backward classes of citizens to realize 
the benefits of the reservation and disparity still prevails in the society and there is 
no achievement of level playing field. Moreover, the reservation in appointments 
introduced in the year 1981 also did not enable the Other Backward Classes of 
citizens to get their rightful share in employment and still there is inadequate 
representation in employment including in the promotional posts. Considering the 
fact that there exists no mathematical limit of 50% in aggregate for reservations, 
therefore it is essential that reservations for the backward classes of citizens be 
increased in proportion to the increase in their population over the years and shall 
be made proportionate to their population in the Caste Census. 


Further, to achieve substantive equality, it is imperative that Articles 15 and 
16 of the Constitution should be amended to increase the quantum of reservations 
of Socially and Educationally Backward Classes of citizens proportionate to their 
Caste Census. 


The Constitution (Seventy-seventh Amendment) Act, 1995 inserted clause 
(4A) to Article 16 to extend the benefit of reservations in promotions as clause (4) 
is confined only to reservation in initial appointments. Parliament felt that it was 
necessary to continue providing reservations in promotion posts as well in the case 
of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. However, the said amendment did 
not consider the case of OBCs. 


The discrimination faced by the OBCs is comparable and a similar level to 
the discrimination faced by the SCs and the STs. The abhorrent and inhuman 
system of classification of human beings merely based on their birth, over which 
they obviously had no control, led to systemic oppression and discrimination. The 
effect of this systemic discrimination was not just economic, it was social and 
psychological which was the primary reason for insertion of article 16(4) in the 
Constitution. 


OBCs are constitutionally recognized to be socially backward but still there 
are no enabling provisions to provide reservations for them in promotional posts. 
Due to such non-inclusion, the OBCs are vastly unrepresented at the higher posts 
of the administration as they were never considered for promotions due to social 
status. 


Recently, Parliament has extended the benefit of reservations to forward 
castes also in the category of economically weaker sections. Due to absence of the 
aforesaid Constitutional mandate in promotions, the real oppressed and 
downtrodden are not brought into the mainstream till today. Mere entry into 
service is not sufficient. Only when the OBCs are duly represented in promotional 
posts, a truly representative administration could be achieved, and real substantive 
equality is enabled. 


Therefore, Article 16 of the Constitution of India must be further amended to 
grant reservations in promotional posts with consequential seniority for the 
backward classes of citizens and this would result in true social justice as it would 
ensure adequate representation of the backward class of citizens in higher offices 
of the administration. 


India is a diverse nation with a rich tapestry of cultures, communities, 
genders, and religions. The preamble of our Constitution envisions securing social 
justice for all. However, the current composition of the higher judiciary does not 
adequately reflect this diversity. The current trend in judicial appointments shows a 
low representation of socially marginalized groups and there is significant over- 
representation of certain sections. 


A representative judiciary is pivotal for fostering public confidence in the 
judiciary's ability to make sound and responsive decisions. When the judiciary 
includes Judges from all sections of society, it instills greater confidence amongst 
the public. Further, a diverse judiciary is imperative to enhance the quality of 
judicial decisions. Judges bring their personal experiences and perspectives to the 
bench, influencing how they interpret and apply the law. 


230 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


A diverse judiciary is also less likely to violate the rights of underrepresented 
classes and more likely to prevent discrimination. The lack of Judges from 
historically oppressed and minority communities indicates systemic barriers that 
must be addressed. Increasing diversity ensures that the judiciary protects the 
rights of all citizens and reflects the nation's pluralistic society. A constitutional 
mandate in this regard would ensure that the superior courts are never 
underrepresented. It is of utmost importance that equitable representation and fair 
play in the higher judiciary are secured through constitutional channels. 


The Collegium of the Justice(s) of the Hon’ble Supreme Court and Hon’ble 
High Courts is an aspect of judicial appointments which is a closed-door 
phenomenon. Having a transparent procedure for judicial appointments would 
reflect a greater faith in the Constitution and the Judiciary. An established 
Memorandum of Procedure by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India for appointment of Judges of the Supreme Court and in 
consultation with all the State Governments, Governments of Union Territories, 
the Chief Justice of India and Chief Justices of all State High Courts for 
appointment of Judges of High Courts, would ensure that there are no deviations in 
conventions and would also ensure that the judicial appointments are fair and 
transparent. Furthermore, to enhance transparency, the Collegium should also 
consider the opinion of their respective State Governments while recommending 
names for appointment as Judges of the High Courts to the Central Government. 
Despite judicial pronouncements on the appointment of Judges calling for a 
Memorandum of Procedure, no such memorandum has been finalized till date by 
the Central Government. 


Further, when the Judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts have the 
power of judicial review to test the policies and laws made or enacted by the 
lawfully and democratically elected State Governments, it is sequitur that the 
views and opinions of the concerned State Governments be heard before making 
such appointments. After all, the State and the Central Governments are equal and 
function in the spirit of co-operative federalism. 


Therefore, this Bill seeks to amend the Constitution of India to provide for 
social diversity in the appointment of Judges to the Supreme Court and High 
Courts, proportional to the population of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and 
Other Backward Classes and to bring transparency in judicial appointments in 
higher judiciary. Providing for reservation in judicial appointments, with an aim to 
promote social diversity, will definitely help in improving the quality of judicial 
decisions, enhancing public confidence, bringing transparency to judicial 
appointments and upholding the constitutional values of equality and inclusivity. 


Presently, the Supreme Court of India currently hears all appeals from the 
High Courts and Tribunals across India, apart from exercising original jurisdiction 
and writ jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution of India. When the 
framers of our Constitution drafted Article 108A of the Draft Constitution, which 
was enacted and renumbered as Article 130, their intention was that in case the 
capital is shifted to any place other than Delhi, or if it became necessary to have 
"circuit Courts or regional Benches" of the Supreme Court, there should be a 
provision in the Constitution to enable such a need. Article 130 therefore 
empowers the Chief Justice of India to establish regional benches of Supreme 
Court in consultation with the President for the purpose of effective delivery of 
justice. 


The framers of the Constitution, particularly Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, while 
debating Article 108-A of the Draft Constitution, which ultimately was enacted as 
Article 130, considered it appropriate to entrust the powers of establishment of 
Regional Benches to the Chief Justice of India. Since the enactment of our 
Constitution, the population of the country has grown over four times, and the 
docket of the Supreme Court has grown about 10,000 times. This is also because of 
the rapid economic and social growth of our nation. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 231 


For decades now, there has been a widespread demand from various quarters 
for the establishment of Permanent Regional Benches of the Supreme Court. Many 
representations have been made from various Bar Associations and litigants from 
across the country. The people's representatives in Parliament have also often 
raised this issue of Permanent Regional Benches of Supreme Court. The Standing 
Committees of Parliament recommended the setting up of Regional benches of the 
Supreme Court in 2004, 2005, and 2006. The Law Commission in its Report No. 
229 dated 05.08.2009 to the Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India has 
also emphasized the need for the establishment of "Cassation Benches" of the 
Supreme Court at New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata. 


The advantages of setting up Regional Benches are many fold: Presently, 
access to the Supreme Court is restricted to only those with the economic means to 
travel to Delhi and afford a lawyer in Delhi. This effectively rules out a large 
percentage of the population who do not have the economic means, and therefore 
can litigate only up to the High Court. In some cases, such as some categories of 
Writ Petitions, the case is heard at the first instance itself by a Division Bench of 
the High Court, and appeal against the same is only to the Supreme Court. 
Therefore, a person, who cannot afford to go to Delhi, or afford the fees of the 
lawyers at Delhi, which is invariably higher due to demand, is left without an 
appellate remedy. Therefore, litigation at the Supreme Court is increasingly 
becoming available only to the affluent class, and the economically weaker 
sections of society are deprived of access to the Apex Court. 


Further, setting up of regional Benches of the Supreme Court would also 
increase the strength of the Bench of the Supreme Court. Presently, the ratio of 
number of Supreme Court Judges to the population of the country and the docket 
of the Court is miniscule. There are only 34 Judges for a country with a population 
of 133 crores. Having Regional Benches would necessarily increase the Bench 
strength of the Supreme Court as well. This would need a separate amendment to 
the Supreme Court (Number of Judges) Act, 1956. 


The proposed amendment divides the Supreme Court into one Constitution 
Bench at the capital, and four regional Benches. The Constitution Bench would 
hear important constitutional cases only. The discretion to classify a case as a 
constitutional case has been conferred on the Chief Justice of India. Generally, 
constitutional cases are heard and decided by a Bench of five Judges or more. 
Regional Benches have been empowered under this amendment to exercise the full 
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in all matters other than Constitution cases. 


The persistent problem of backlog of cases in the higher judiciary - the High 
Courts and Supreme Court - is a matter of grave public concern. It is a well-known 
adage that justice delayed is justice denied. There are several factors which 
contribute to the inability of our higher judiciary to effectively tackle the backlog 
of cases. One of the chief causes of delay in disposing cases is the large number of 
vacancies in High Courts across the country. However, due to various reasons, this 
process is not completed on time leading to large number of vacancies as stated 
above. 


One of the ways in which this situation can be ameliorated is by increasing 
the age of retirement of High Court Judges from 62 to 65 years. When the 
Constitution was originally enacted, article 217 (४) fixed the age of retirement of 
High Court Judges as 60 years. Subsequently, within 13 years, it was realized that 
the human body and mind does not become so incapacitate at the age of 60 that 
Judge must retire at that age. Hence, by virtue of the Constitution (Fifteenth 
Amendment) Act, 1963, the age of retirement was increased to 62 years. From 
1963 onwards, the age of retirement has remained at 62. Over the past five 
decades, advancement in science and technology, medicine, better infrastructure 
and lifestyle has allowed Indians in other walks of life to be efficient, functional 
and work well up to the age of about 75 years. 


In these circumstances, the time has come to increase the age of retirement of 
Judges of the High Court from 62 to 65 years. This would not only help the 


232 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


judicial system but also the public at large, specifically the litigants before the 
Courts. The judicial system would be greatly benefited because a person who has a 
wealth of experience under his or her belt by virtue of a long tenure in the High 
Court would continue to serve the High Court for a further period of 3 years. 
Undoubtedly, the experience of the Judge would mean that he or she is better 
suited to perform the functions of a Judge than a newly elevated Judge of the High 
Court. The wealth of judicial experience gained over a decade or so in the High 
Court cannot be replaced by a newly elevated Judge. Longer tenures also ensure 
impartiality of Judges - an oft-raised criticism is that Judges begin looking for 
post-retirement jobs in the last year of their service. This can be removed by 
extending their tenure by a further three years. Similarly, the litigant public is also 
benefited, since the occurrence of vacancies would be less frequent and 
consequently, there would be Judges to hear and dispose of cases. Such a move 
would also benefit the Government of the day, since the Government would not be 
frequently embroiled with the process of appointment of new Judges. 


In 2000, the National Commission to Review the Working of the 
Constitution (NCRWC), also known as Justice M.N. Venkatachaliah Commission, 
was set up by the then NDA Government. The said Commission submitted its 
report in the year 2002. One of the recommendations of this Commission was to 
increase age of retirement of Judges of the High Court to 65 years. In 2010, the 
Constitution (1147 Amendment) Bill was tabled to increase the retirement age of 
High Court Judges to 65 years. However, this Bill could not be passed. 


Internationally, the age of retirement of Judges is well above the current age 
of 62 years in India. The age of retirement of Judges in developed countries with 
good medical facilities and infrastructure is around 70. The USA, Austria and 
Greece have lifetime tenure for Judges of its Supreme Court and Federal Courts. In 
the U.K., the age of retirement is presently 70, though there have been calls to 
increase it to 75. In Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway and 
Australia, the retirement age for judges is 70 years. Judges in Canada and Germany 
retire at 75 and 68, respectively. Although India is a developing country, the 
Government provides Judges of the High Court with staff car, housing and 
sufficient facilities like office assistants, domestic assistants, etc. Therefore, our 
Judges are definitely in a position to continue serving as Judges of the High court 
till the age of 65 years. Therefore, the Bill proposes to increase the age of 
retirement of High Court Judges by amending the Constitution Articles 217 (४) and 
224 (3). 


An objective and thorough census across the country will give a correct 
picture of the representation of castes and communities in mainstream education 
and employment. Only based on such a scientific and empirical data can we make 
targeted, effective, affirmative action policies to uplift the really backward 
communities. 


The States are not in a position to grant any reservation to any class or 
communities for want of empirical data and any reservation laws enacted by the 
states are being struck down by Constitutional Courts on the ground of lack of 
empirical data. Thus, the mandate of reservation by the Constitution is being 
defeated. 


The States are in need of an accurate caste census data to enact targeted 
welfare measures on the basis of caste and community. Ultimately, this leads to 
perpetuating the status quo and social injustice. The data collected 92 years back 
cannot determine the entitlement and share of communities in this country. 


The 731 and 747 constitutional amendments advocated the need of 
strengthening the local bodies and parts IX and IXA of the Constitution provided 
for a robust framework for conducting local body elections. The prime objective 
was democratic decentralization of power and participation of the oppressed and 
backward classes in governance. The amendments provided for mandatory 
reservation for Scheduled Caste and Schedule Tribe communities and women 
belonging to these communities. On the other hand, for backward classes, the 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 233 


Articles 243-D(6) and 243-T(6) were only enabling in nature. When States have 
attempted to apply these provisions, there were legal obstacles due to which 
reservations granted to OBC communities in local bodies have been struck down 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The impediment to the States to grant OBC 
reservations was due to want of ‘empirical data’. With the advent of 105" 
constitutional amendment and insertion of Article 342A(3), a State or a Union 
Territory can gather information for ascertaining political backwardness of the 
backward classes and can specify the proportion of the reservation required local 
body-wise and can prepare and maintain for its own purposes, a list of socially and 
educationally backward classes. 


However, the entry 69 in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution 
empowers only the Union to conduct census. Since, a State or a Union Territory is 
not empowered to conduct their own census, the population of each class or 
community on the basis of local units cannot be ascertained by the States and 
consequentially, maintaining an accurate head count based upon the list of 
backward classes contemplated under Article 342A(3) would not be possible. 


The objectives of democratic decentralization are not only to bring 
governance closer to the people, but also to make it more participatory, inclusive 
and accountable to the weaker sections of the society. Reservations in local self- 
government are intended to directly benefit the community as a whole rather than 
just the elected representatives. Despite the fact that Parts IX and IXA were 
introduced in the Constitution 30 years ago, reservation in politics and sharing of 
political power is still a distant dream, leaving the OBCs unrepresented in the local 
self-governments. 


Therefore, placing the entry “census” in the Concurrent List would enable 
both the Union and the States to conduct their own census. The power to conduct a 
headcount by the States themselves will not only be useful for maintaining an 
accurate list of all classes including backward classes under Article 342A(3), and 
collect empirical data of communities on the basis of the local units and to grant 
reservations in local bodies, but also for other targeted welfare measures. This will 
enable the States to implement appropriate affirmative and welfare measures for all 
castes and communities based upon their due entitlement and share. The States can 
then grant reservations in accordance with this data, which would be 
constitutionally and legally tenable and therefore avoid judicial intervention in the 
grant of reservations. 


Hence, this Bill. 
P. WILSON. 


234 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 5 of the Bill provides for establishment of four Permanent Regional 
Benches of the Supreme Court at New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai. The 
Bill, therefore, if enacted will involve expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of 
India for creation of Regional Benches of Supreme Court at Chennai, Kolkata and 
Mumbai which includes land cost, construction, infrastructure, staff and other 
expenditure. It is likely to involve an initial expenditure of rupees six hundred 
crores for establishment of Benches including infrastructure and annual recurring 


expenditure of about rupees one hundred crores from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 235 


XXVII 


Bill No. वा of 2026 


A Bill to provide for proceedings of all Courts, Tribunals and Commissions 
to be held virtually in order to facilitate efficient and timely 
judicial proceedings, mitigate delays, reduce costs and 
increase convenience for all parties involved and 
for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the 
Republic of India as follows: — 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Virtual Court Proceedings Act, 2026. Short title and 


commencement. 
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 


by notification in Official Gazette, appoint. 


Definitions. 


Virtual court 
proceedings. 


236 


2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — 


(a) “Commissions” includes all Commissions established by the 
Acts of the Parliament; 


(b) “Courts” means the Supreme Court of India and High Courts 
of the States and includes a physical Court and a virtual Court; 


(c) “live link” means and includes a live television link, audio- 
video electronic means or other arrangements provided by the Courts 
or Tribunals or Commissions, to the participants for participating in 
the virtual court proceedings; 


(d) “participants” means and includes— 


(i) “advocates” and “senior advocates” defined under 
clause (a), sub-section (/) of section 2 and sub-section (2) of 
section 16, respectively of the Advocates Act, 1961, as well as 
government pleaders/advocates and officers of the department 
of prosecution, 


(ii) parties-in-person to the proceedings, 

(iii) other parties to the proceedings, 

(iv) litigants, officers connected to the proceedings, 
(v) witnesses, and 


(vi) any person who is to be examined, or in whose 
presence certain proceedings are to be recorded or conducted or 
who is required to make submissions or who intends to 
participate in the proceedings on his or her own or on behalf of 
a party to the proceeding, third party with authority or 
permission of the Courts or Tribunals or Commissions, as the 
case may be; 


(e) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules and regulations made 
under this Act; 


(f) “Tribunals” includes all Tribunals and Appellate Tribunals 
established by the Acts of the Parliament; 


(g) “virtual court proceedings” means a proceeding where 
participants are not physically present in the Courts or Tribunals or 
Commissions, as the case may be, but attend and participate through 
electronic mode which may include video conferencing accessed 
through any electronic device, by accessing a live link provided by the 
Courts, Tribunals and Commissions. 


(1) The proceedings of all Courts, Tribunals and Commissions shall be 
held, virtually in electronic mode, by use of electronic communication or 
use of audio-video electronic means such as video conferencing, apart from 
the regular physical hearings and such hearings shall be called as virtual 
court proceedings. 


(2) The proceedings mentioned in sub-section (/) shall include: — 


(a) all trials, inquires and proceedings including issuance of 
notice or summons, recording of evidence, service and execution of 
summons and warrant; 


(b) examination of parties and witnesses; 


25 of 1961. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 237 


(c) pronouncement of orders, judgments, awards; and 


(d) all appellate proceedings or any other proceedings as deemed 
appropriate by the Courts, Tribunals, or Commissions, as the case may 
be. 


(3) The procedure and manner of conduct of the proceedings as given under 
sub-section (2) including the determination or apportioning of costs 
involved in virtual court proceedings and the requisite facilities and 
arrangements to be made for smooth conduct of the virtual court 
proceedings in each Court, Tribunal and Commission shall be governed by 
the rules and regulations framed by the Courts and the Central Government 
in the case of the Tribunals and Commissions. 


(4) The Courts, Tribunals and Commissions, as the case may be, in order to 
enable access to virtual court proceedings, shall provide a live link to the 
participants via email address/mobile number furnished by the participants, 
or in any other manner, as may be prescribed. 


(5) The Courts, Tribunals and Commissions, as the case may be, shall have 
the power to regulate appearances of participants during virtual court 
proceedings including removal or debarring any participant from further 
participation in such proceedings on any of the following grounds: — 


(a) appearing from a vehicle; 


(b) appearing with a background not dignified for participation 
in virtual court proceedings; 


(c) engaging in any activity other than the normal course of 
business; 


(d) engaging in any act which may be considered inappropriate 
while participating in virtual court proceedings; 


(e) occurrence of a technical glitch, either on the part of the 
participant or on the part of the Courts, Tribunals, or Commissions, as 
the case may be, which disables conduct of virtual court proceedings; 


(f) the participant is not authorized by the Court, Tribunal or 
Commission for participating in the virtual court proceedings; 


(g) any other ground, as may be prescribed, through rules, 
regulations and guidelines by the Court, Tribunal or Commission, as 
the case may be. 


(6) There shall be no unauthorized recording of the proceedings by any of 
the participants or by any other person or entity. 


(7) The Courts, Tribunals and Commissions may from time-to-time issue 
directions or guidelines governing the access to and participation in virtual 
court proceedings including online etiquette and publish the same on their 
notice boards and websites. 


(8) Subject to sub-sections (4) and (5), the Courts, Tribunals, or 
Commissions, as the case may be, shall allow participants to appear in 
virtual court proceedings, upon a request made by a participant in such form 
and manner as may be prescribed. 


(9) Subject to maintaining independence, impartiality and credibility 
of judicial proceedings and subject to such rules, regulations, directions 
or guidelines as the Courts or Central Government may issue with 
respect to virtual court proceedings, the Courts, Tribunals and 


238 


Facilities to be 
provided. 


Conduct of 


proceedings. 


Power to remove 
difficulties. 


Provisions of the 
Act to have an 
overriding effect. 


Power of Courts 
to make rules. 


Power of Central 
Government to 
make rule. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Commissions may adopt such technological advances as may become 
available from time to time, for improving the quality and efficiency of 
the virtual court proceedings. 


All Courts, Tribunals and Commissions shall provide the following 
facilities: — 


(a) e-filing of pleadings and documents as required; 
(b) e-verification of pleadings and documents as required; and 
(c) virtual certified copies of the orders and judgements as required. 


(1) All virtual court proceedings conducted by the Courts, Tribunals, or 
Commissions shall be judicial proceedings and all the courtesies and 
protocols applicable to a physical Court shall apply to such proceedings. 


(2) All relevant statutory provisions applicable to judicial proceedings 
including provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, the Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, 
the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, and the Information Technology Act, 
2000, shall apply to virtual court proceedings. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear 
to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 


Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Courts shall have the 
power to make rules, regulations, directions or orders, as may be required, 
for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules with respect to the 
Tribunals and Commissions for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


45 of 2023. 
46 of 2023. 
47 of 2023. 
70 of 1971. 
21 of 2000. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 239 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The advent of COVID-19 pandemic had forced us to conduct court proceedings 
virtually. Virtual courts have enabled participation from remote areas irrespective of 
geographical or economic constraints, eliminating the need for individuals to bear 
significant financial burdens associated with physically attending court sessions. 


However, just like the COVID-19 times are behind us, the virtual courts are 
slowly becoming a thing of the past in some Tribunals and it is seen that even though 
Government had invested a huge amount of public money in the infrastructure for 
conducting and promoting virtual courts, this facility is not being utilized even though 
there is demand for the same. 


The concept of access to justice has been etched in our Constitution. Virtual court 
can enable dispensation of justice to all citizens by mitigating delays, reducing costs 
and increasing convenience for all parties. Access to virtual court hearings not only 
help in reduced litigation costs, but also make complex and time-consuming judicial 
procedures accessible and convenient to the lay man. It also prevents a litigant 
belonging to other parts of the country from bearing the cost of travel, lodging and 
extra fees of the lawyer since most of the Commissions, Tribunals and the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court are situated at Delhi. Each time a case is adjourned for want of a lawyer; 
it is the litigant who bears the expense. It is also pertinent to note that a common reason 
for adjournments at the Supreme Court of India, High Courts and appellate tribunals is 
that the counsels from various parts of the country cannot make it to the hearing due to 
various reasons. Therefore, mandatory virtual court proceedings would certainly aid in 
the effective delivery of justice to all sections of citizens. Furthermore, virtual courts 
proceedings could also make the legal process more streamlined by reducing 
paperwork and automating administrative tasks. 


Therefore, the present Bill proposes to mandate virtual court hearings and achieve 
the above objectives. 


Hence this Bill. 
P. WILSON. 


240 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Sub-clause (9) of Clause 3 of the Bill provides that the Courts, Tribunals and 
Commissions may, subject to the rules, regulations, directions or guidelines as the 
Courts or Central Government may issue with respect to virtual court proceedings, 
adopt such technological advances as may become available from time to time, for 
improving the quality and efficiency of the virtual court proceedings. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, is likely to involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. However, at this stage, it is not possible to quantify the 
exact amount of recurring and non-recurring expenditure likely to be involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 241 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, make such order, 
as necessary for removing any difficulty to give effect to the provisions of this Bill. 
Clause 8 empowers the Courts to make rules, regulations, directions or orders, as may 
be required, for carrying out the purposes of this Bill and Clause 9 empowers the 
Central Government to make rules with respect to the Tribunals and Commissions to 
carry out the provisions of this Bill. 


As the orders, rules, regulations, directions etc. will relate to matters of details 
only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal character. 


242 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


XXVIII 


Bill No. II of 2026 


A Bill to give effect to the constitutional guarantee of religious autonomy 
under articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India by providing a national 
framework for autonomous, transparent, community-led and 
professionally governed management of Hindu temples 
and religious endowments; to ensure protection of 
India’s temple heritage, rituals and traditions; 
to secure financial integrity and optimal 
utilisation of temple assets for religious 
and community welfare purposes; 
and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental 
thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER 1 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (J) This Act may be called the Temple Autonomy, Governance and Cultural 
Heritage Management Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


SEC. 2] 


Definitions. 2. 


Preservation of 3. 
religious 
autonomy. 


Scope of 4, 
permissible 
regulation. 


Non- 5. 
interference in 

religious 

matters. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 243 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Agamas” means the canonical texts governing temple rituals, 
architecture, administration, and religious practices within Hindu 
traditions; 


(b) “Authority” means the National Temple Heritage Authority 
established under section 16 of this Act; 


(c) “Board” means the Independent Temple Management Board 
constituted under section 6 of this Act ; 


(d) “denominational representatives” includes hereditary trustees, 
traditional custodians, priests, maths or recognised sectarian bodies 
having a historical or traditional interest in the temple; 


(e) “heritage temple” means a temple of archaeological, historical, 
architectural, or cultural importance, as may be notified by the Central 
Government or by the State Government with the approval of the 
Central Government; 


(f) “large temple” means a temple whose average annual gross 
income exceeds rupees one hundred crore over the preceding three 
financial years, as may be notified by the Central Government; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(h) “temple” means a public Hindu religious institution dedicated 
to the worship of a Hindu deity, including temples, maths, 
devasthanams, and allied religious endowments, as may be notified by 
the Central Government; 


(i) “temple assets” includes all movable and immovable 
properties, which may include, but not limited to, offerings, funds, 
securities, jewellery, lands, buildings, records, and rights belonging to 
or endowed to a temple. 


CHAPTER II 
CONSTITUTIONAL PRINCIPLES AND LIMITS OF REGULATION 


(1) A notification of temples by the Central Government under this Act shall 
recognise Hindu temples as religious institutions entitled to autonomy in 
matters of religion, rituals, and internal governance. 


(2) Every temple, on being notified under this Act, shall be recognized as 
religious institutions entitled to autonomy in matters of religion, rituals, and 
internal governance. 


(1) The regulations under this Act shall not extend to theological 
interpretations or essential religious practices. 


(2) The regulatory powers exercised under this Act shall be limited to:— 
(a) ensuring financial accountability and transparency; 
(b) prevention of mismanagement or misappropriation; 
(c) protection and safeguarding of temple property; and 
(d) conservation of cultural and architectural heritage. 
No authority constituted under this Act shall:— 


(a) alter or modify the established rituals, customs or modes of 
worship; or 


(b) interfere with Agamic prescriptions; or 


(c) appoint or remove priests except in accordance with 
established denominational practice. 


244 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


CHAPTER III 
INDEPENDENT TEMPLE MANAGEMENT BOARDS 


6. (1) Every temple shall be governed by an Independent Temple Constitution of 


Management Board, which shall be constituted by the Authority in oo 
accordance with the provisions of section 18 of this Act. Management 


Boards. 
(2) The Board shall be responsible for the administration, management nee 


and governance of the temple in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act. 


(3) The Board shall consist of the following members:— 


(a) such number of denominational representatives, as may be 
prescribed; 


(b) one chartered accountant, possessing such qualifications 
and experience as may be prescribed; 


(c) one person having expertise in law; 


(d) one heritage conservationist, whose inclusion shall be 
mandatory in respect of heritage temples; 


(e) one representative of employees of the temple. 


(4) The members of the Board shall elect from amongst themselves a 
Chairperson. 


(5) The manner of appointment, remuneration, allowances and other 
terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and members shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


(6) The Board shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. 


7. No person shall be eligible for appointment as a Chairperson or member of a Disqualifications. 
Board if such person:— 


(a) is a serving government officer; or 
(b) holds any political office; or 
(c) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude. 


8. (1) The Chairperson and members of the Board shall hold office for a term of Tenure = and 
five years. removal. 


(2) A member or Chairperson of the Board shall be removed only in the event 
of approved misconduct, incapacity, or financial irregularity, after due 
inquiry, conducted in such manner as may be prescribed. 


9. (1) The transfer of administrative control of temples under State Transfer —_ of 
administration to the Boards constituted under section 6 of this Act shall be areas rene 

हि A 5 हि है control to the 

carried out in such manner, as may be prescribed, which shall not ordinarily Boards. 


exceed twelve months from the date of commencement of this Act. 
(2) Upon such transfer: 
(a) the management of temple assets shall vest in the Board; 


(b) the officers of the State Government shall cease to exercise 
any executive or administrative control over such temple; 


(c) all existing records, accounts, and properties shall be handed 
over intact to the Board; and 


(d) all legal proceedings pending immediately before such transfer 
shall continue in the name of the temple. 


Ring-fencing 
of temple 
income. 


Audit of 
temples. 


Productive 
utilization of 
assets. 


Prohibition on 
alienation. 


Protection of 
rituals and 
traditions. 


Architectural 
safeguards. 


Establishment of 
the National 
Temple Heritage 
Authority. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 245 


CHAPTER IV 
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND TRANSPARENCY 


10. (1) The Board shall manage and administer the income of a temple which 
shall be solely utilised for: — 


(a) arrangement for the proper performance of worship and rituals 
at the temple and to provide facilities to the pilgrims; 


(b) maintenance, conservation and administration, which shall 
include developmental activities concerning the area of the temple and 
its surroundings including construction of buildings; 


(c) education, healthcare, annadanam, and charitable activities 
and for such other related purposes as may be prescribed. 


(2) No part of the income of a temple shall be credited to the Consolidated 
Fund of India or of any State. 


11. Every temple shall be subject to a mandatory annual audit to be conducted by 
an independent auditor in such manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the large temples shall also be subject to statutory audit, 
social audit as well as heritage impact audit, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


12. (1) Subject to the standards or regulations made by the Authority, the assets 
of temple lying idle or underutilised may be utilised for: — 


(a) pilgrim amenities and community welfare purposes; 
(b) cultural centres; and 
(c) skill development and livelihood programmes. 
(2) Any leasing of temple assets shall be transparent and time-bound. 


13. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, no permanent alienation of temple property shall be effected except 
with the prior sanction of a court of competent jurisdiction. 


CHAPTER V 
CULTURAL AND ARCHITECTURAL HERITAGE PROTECTION 
14... Every Board shall ensure the continuity and protection of: 
(a) Agamic rituals; 
(b) festivals; and 
(c) oral and textual traditions 
associated with the temple. 


15. (1) No person or authority shall affect any structural alteration without 
obtaining prior heritage clearance in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every restoration work in a temple, shall conform to the recognized 
conservation principles and shall prioritise authenticity over modernisation. 
CHAPTER VI 
NATIONAL TEMPLE HERITAGE AUTHORITY 
16. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish an Authority to be known as the National Temple Heritage 


Authority to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 


246 


17. 


18. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and 
be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at such place in the country as 
the Central Government may notify in the Official Gazette. 


(4) The Authority may, with the approval of the Central Government, 
establish its offices at such other places within the country, as it may deem 
necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely: 


(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of eminence in 
constitutional law, public administration, heritage conservation or 
religious endowment governance; 


(b) two members having recognised expertise in temple 
architecture, archaeology, or heritage conservation; 


(c) one member having expertise in financial management, 
audit, or trust governance; 


(d) one member, who shall be a scholar of Hindu Agamas or 
traditional temple systems; 


(e) one member representing temple management boards on a 
rotational basis; 


(f) one ex officio member nominated by the Union Ministry of 
Culture; 


(g) one ex officio member nominated by the Union Ministry of 
Law and Justice. 


(2) The Chairperson and members shall be appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of a Selection Committee 
constituted for such purpose in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(3) The term of office of, salaries and allowances payable to, other terms 
and conditions of service of, resignation by and removal of the 
Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed: 


Provided that removal shall only be for proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after due inquiry conducted in such manner as may be prescribed. 


The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:— 


(a) to appoint, constitute and regulate the Boards, constituted 
under section 6, with the prior approval of the Central Government, in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, and to appoint members of 
such Boards by notification in the Official Gazette, in a transparent 
manner ensuring that the composition of each Board complies with the 
eligibility conditions, denominational representation and professional 
requirements specified under this Act; 


(b) to frame and notify minimum governance standards for 
Independent Temple Management Boards, including norms relating to 
transparency, accounting, ethical administration and management of 
conflict of interest, and to issue advisory guidelines on professional 
management practices consistent with denominational autonomy. 


(c) to establish and maintain a comprehensive, publicly 
accessible National Digital Temple Registry containing 
comprehensive information relating to temples and _ religious 
endowments, including details of temple assets and properties, 
management structures, audited financial statements, heritage 
classification and conservation status, and to ensure digitisation of 
records, inventories, and archival material relating to temples; 


Composition 
of the 
Authority. 


Functions — of 
the Authority. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 247 


(d) to discharge heritage protection and advisory role by: 


(i) advising the Boards on conservation, restoration and 
preservation of architectural and intangible cultural heritage; 


(ii) coordinating with archaeological and heritage authorities 
for protection of ancient temples; and 


(iii) promoting best practices in conservation consistent with 
Agamic prescriptions. 


re of the 19. The Authority may, for the purpose of discharging its functions, 
Authority. 


(a) call for information, records or reports from any Board; and 


(b) issue advisory directions to Boards for rectification of systemic 
deficiencies: 


Provided that the Authority shall not exercise any executive, 
religious or ritual control over temples and shall also not supersede or 
dissolve any Board. 


Power to make 20. The Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, make 
TEE भांणा5. regulations consistent with this Act to carry out its functions, by notification 
in the Official Gazette. 
CHAPTER VII 
OFFENCE AND PENALTIES 
Misappropriation 21. Any person who commits misappropriation of temple funds shall be 


obtempletunds; punishable with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and with 
fine, or with both. 


CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
Central 22. The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
हक by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the Authority, for carrying 
रह : out the purposes of this Act. 
Accounts and 23. (J) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
गाता: and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be 
prescribed, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of 
India. 
(2) The accounts of the Authority, as audited and certified by the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this 
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually by 
the Authority to the Central Government, which shall cause the same to be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament. 
Protection of 24. No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Board or the Authority 
peeps ms or its members or its officers for actions taken in good faith in pursuance of 
j this Act or of any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder. 
Overriding 25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
ae Orns inconsistent therewith contained in any law relating to Hindu Religious and 
: Charitable Endowments or any other law for the time being in force. 
aa make 26. (J) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
rules. 


make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule or regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two 
or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both 


248 


27. 


28. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or 
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or regulation. 


(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear 
to be necessary for removing the difficulty. 


(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 


Nothing in this Act shall— 


(a) be deemed to authorise any interference in matters of religious 
doctrine, rituals, customs or denominational practices of any temple; 


(b) affect the operation of any law for the time being in force 
relating to archaeological or heritage protection, conservation or 
preservation of monuments or sites, insofar as such law is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act; 


(c) affect the jurisdiction of any court, tribunal or other authority 
in respect of any proceeding instituted or order passed prior to the 
commencement of this Act; or 


(६) invalidate anything done or any action taken in good faith 
under any law relating to Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments 
before the commencement of this Act, insofar as such action is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. 


Power 
remove 
difficulties. 


Savings. 


to 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India guarantee freedom of 
religion and confer upon every religious denomination, the right to manage its 
own affairs in matters of religion, to establish and maintain religious institutions 
and to administer property in accordance with law. 


Notwithstanding these guarantees, the administration of Hindu religious 
institutions in several States continues to be governed by State-controlled 
statutory mechanisms under various Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments 
laws. Over time, such arrangements have resulted in excessive bureaucratic 
control over religious affairs, diversion of temple revenues for non-religious 
purposes, political intervention in temple administration and dilution of 
traditional Agamic, ritualistic and architectural practices. 


In contrast, religious institutions of minority communities are governed 
under autonomous, community-led statutory frameworks such as the Sikh 
Gurdwaras Act, 1925 and the Unified Waqf Management, Empowerment, 
Efficiency and Development Act, 1995. Comparative international practice also 
indicates that while States regulate religious institutions for financial 
accountability and heritage protection, management is ordinarily vested in the 
religious community itself. 


The Bill seeks to establish a uniform national framework to provide for 
autonomous, transparent and professionally governed management of Hindu 
temples and religious endowments, consistent with articles 25 and 26 of the 
Constitution. It aims to de-bureaucratise temple administration, ensure financial 
integrity and accountability, protect cultural and architectural heritage, and enable 
lawful and productive utilisation of temple assets for religious and community 
welfare purposes. The Bill does not seek to interfere with matters of religion or 
essential religious practices and confines regulation to secular aspects of 
administration and heritage protection. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SUJEET KUMAR. 


249 


250 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 of the Bill provides for constitution of Independent Temple 
Management Boards, its composition, salaries and allowances payable and other 
terms and conditions of services of the members of the Board. Clause 16 provides 
for the establishment of the National Temple Heritage Authority to exercise the 
powers conferred upon and to perform the functions assigned to it under this Act 
and clause 17 provides for its composition and the salaries and allowances 
payable to the Chairperson and Members thereof as well as the other terms and 
conditions of their service. Clause 18, sub-clause (c) provides for creation of a 
National Digital Temple Registry to establish and maintain comprehensive, 
publicly accessible details of temples and religious endowments, etc. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of India. It is estimated that a recurring expenditure of about 
rupees five crore would be incurred per annum from the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


A non-recurring expenditure of about rupees ten crore is also likely to be 
involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 251 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the National Temple Heritage Authority to 
make regulations consistent with the proposed legislation to carry out its 
functions, with the prior approval of the Central Government. 


Clause 26 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. Clause 27 provides that the 
Central Government may make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary 
for removing any difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made 
relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


252 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. VII of 2026 


A Bill to recognise emergency survival during the Golden Hour as a public health 
right intrinsically linked to the right to life; to establish a decentralized 
national emergency survival ecosystem through mandatory public 
access defibrillation, universal life-support education, digital 
integration of emergency response assets, legal protection 
for citizen responders, and coordinated institutional 
responsibility across public and private sectors; 
and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows: 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Advanced Medical Response Infrastructure 
and Training Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


Right to 
medical 
assistance 
during 
Golden Hour. 


Duty of the 
appropriate 
Government. 


Mandatory 
installation of 
Defibrillator. 


SEC. 2] 


2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 253 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "appropriate Government" means — 
(i) in the case of a State, the Government of that State; 


(ii) in the case of an Union Territory having its own 
legislature, the Government of that Union Territory; and 


(iii) in other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “Basic Life Support” includes Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation 
(CPR), use of Defibrillators and immediate life-saving measures prior to 
the arrival of professional medical services; 


(c) “Defibrillator” means a portable electronic medical device, 
namely, the Automated External Defibrillator, approved by the Central 
Drugs Standard Control Organisation for diagnosing and treating sudden 
cardiac arrest; 


(d) “Golden Hour” means the first sixty minutes following the onset 
of a life-threatening medical emergency; 


(e) “good samaritan” means any person who, in good faith and 
without expectation of reward or compensation, renders emergency 
medical assistance; 


(f) “high-footfall public place” means any premises accessed by the 
public, exceeding such thresholds as may be notified by the Central 
Government; 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; and 
(h) “Registry” means the digital, geo-tagged National Defibrillator 
Registry established under Section 9 of this Act. 
CHAPTER II 
RIGHT TO EMERGENCY SURVIVAL 


(1) Every person shall have the right to reasonable access to immediate 
life-saving medical assistance during the Golden Hour, occurring within 
the territory of India. 


(2) The Central Government shall take all necessary administrative 
and financial measures to operationalise the right under this section, 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


The appropriate Government shall — 


(a) ensure availability of essential life-saving equipment in public 
and semi-public spaces, in such manner as may be prescribed; 


(b) promote universal training in life-support skills, as may be 
prescribed; 


(c) integrate emergency infrastructure with digital and 
communication platforms; and 


(d) protect and encourage citizens acting in good faith during 
medical emergencies. 
CHAPTER Ii 
PUBLIC ACCESS DEFIBRILLATION INFRASTRUCTURE 
(1) The following premises, as may be notified by the appropriate 


Government, shall mandatorily install, maintain and make publicly 
accessible, at least one functional Defibrillator at— 


(a) transport hubs, namely, airports, railway stations, metro stations, 


254 


10. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


bus terminals, ports and major transport interchanges; 


(b) shopping centres, cinemas, stadiums, convention halls and 
entertainment venues; 


(c) educational institutions exceeding enrolment thresholds as may 
be prescribed; 


(d) religious, cultural and pilgrimage institutions with substantial 
public congregation; 

(e) government buildings and public sector establishments, including 
their residential complexes comprising fifty or more dwelling units; 

(f) private residential complexes comprising fifty or more dwelling 
units; 

(g) workplaces employing two hundred and fifty or more persons; 
and 

(h) any other high-footfall public place. 


(2) The Defibrillator shall be placed in clearly visible, unlocked and 
accessible locations, accompanied by standardised signage and basic 
operating instructions. 


The Central Government may notify alternative and non-traditional 
Defibrillator deployment mechanisms, including — 


(a) integration with vending machines or automated kiosks; 
(b) installation at street-level public utilities; and 
(c) mobile or vehicle-mounted Defibrillator units: 


Provided that such deployment may be supported through public-private 
partnerships, cross-subsidisation models, or corporate social responsibility 
funding, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(1) Every premise notified under section 5 shall comply with the 
provisions of this Act within — 


(a) twelve months in the case of transport hubs, government buildings 
and public sector establishments; and 


(b) eighteen months in the case of private establishments and 
residential complexes. 


(2) The appropriate Government shall require the premises falling in any 
of the categories mentioned under section 5, which are completed after the 
commencement of this Act, to comply with its provisions prior to the 
issuance of any occupancy certificate, licence or operational approval. 


The Central Government shall establish a digital platform integrating 
emergency call systems, Defibrillator locations and trained volunteer 
responders. 


(1) The Central Government shall establish and maintain a geo-tagged 
National Defibrillator Registry, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The registration of every installed Defibrillator shall be mandatory. 


(3) The Registry shall be interoperable with State and municipal 
emergency response systems. 


(1) The National Defibrillator Registry shall operate on an open 
Application Programming Interface, as may be prescribed, basis to 
enable— 


(a) real-time public access through mobile and digital applications; 


Innovative 
deployment 
models. 


Compliance 
timelines. 


National 
emergency 
survival platform. 


National 
Defibrillator 
Registry. 


Accessibility of 
the Registry. 


SEC. 2] 


Community 11. 
first 

responder 

alerts. 


Mandatory 12. 
training in 
secondary 
education. 


Commercial 13. 
driver and 

workforce 

training. 


Community 14. 
training 
programmes. 


Expanded 15. 
Good 

Samaritan 

protection. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 255 


(b) integration with emergency helplines and response systems; and 
(c) navigation to the nearest Defibrillator during an emergency. 


(2) The Registry shall be integrated via Application Programming Interfaces 
with the Computer-Aided Dispatch system of the Emergency Response 
Support System functioning in the country. 


(3) Upon receiving a cardiac emergency call, the Dispatch system 
mentioned at sub-section (2) shall automatically identify registered 
Defibrillator within a five hundred meter radius of the caller and relay this 
location information to: 


(a) the caller; 
(b) dispatched ambulance crews; and 
(c) registered community first responders. 


(4) The Registry shall comply with the provisions of Digital Personal Data 
Protection Act, 2023 and the appropriate data protection and cyber security 
safeguards shall be applied. 


(1) The appropriate Government shall register and train volunteers, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) The volunteers shall receive emergency alerts within a defined 
geographic radius during a medical emergency. 


(3) The participation of persons under this section shall be voluntary and 
subject to Good Samaritan protection provided under clause 15 of this 
Act. 


CHAPTER IV 
UNIVERSAL LIFE SUPPORT EDUCATION 


(1) All students of classes seventh to twelfth shall mandatorily undergo 
training in Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and the operation of 
Defibrillator in such manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed. 


(2) The certification in Basic Life Support shall be a non-graded 
requirement for completion of secondary education. 


(3) The school curriculum, for the purposes of this section, shall emphasise 
on practical competence over theoretical evaluation. 


(J) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, 
every applicant for a commercial driving licence shall undergo mandatory 
Basic Life Support certification. 


(2) Every employer employing two hundred and fifty or more persons 
shall ensure periodic training of designated staff. 


The appropriate Government shall facilitate mass life-support training 
programmes through local authorities, civil society organisations, 
educational institutions and corporate entities. 


CHAPTER V 
LEGAL PROTECTION AND DUTY OF CARE 
(1) No civil, criminal or administrative liability shall arise against any Good 
Samaritan for acts done in good faith while providing emergency 


medical assistance using Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation or a 
Defibrillator. 


(2) No police officer or authority shall compel disclosure of personal 
details or detain such person solely on the ground of having rendered 
assistance. 


22 of 2023. 


59 of 1988. 


256 


16. 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(1) No person in control of any notified premises shall deny access to the 
Defibrillator or obstruct emergency medical assistance during a medical 
emergency. 


(2) Any such obstruction shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or with both. 


CHAPTER VI 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY FUNDING 


The expenditure incurred on Defibrillator installation, maintenance, life- 
support training and public emergency preparedness shall qualify as eligible 
Corporate Social Responsibility expenditure. 


CHAPTER VII 
ADMINISTRATION, PENALTIES AND OVERSIGHT 


(1) The Central Government shall designate a national nodal authority 
under the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to oversee 
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the provisions of this Act. 


(2) The Central Government shall, from time to time, depute such number 
of officers and staff to the nodal authority, as may be required to assist it in 
its efficient functioning, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


The Central Government may authorise officers, who may inspect premises, 
verify compliance and issue directions in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act. 


Any person, institution, authority or entity required under this Act to 
install, maintain, register or provide access to an Defibrillator, or to 
comply with mandatory training or disclosure obligations, fails to do so, 
shall be liable to all or any of the following penalties, namely :— 


(a) fine, which may extend to— 
(i) rupees fifty thousand for the first contravention; 
(ii) rupees one lakh for the second contravention; and 
(iii) rupees five lakh for every subsequent contravention; 


(b) suspension, withholding or non-renewal of licence, registration, 
occupancy certificate or operational permission, where such requirement, 
issuance or renewal is mandatory under any other law for the time being in 
force; and 


(c) mandatory community service, including— 


(i) funding or sponsoring training programmes on 
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation or Defibrillator functioning; 


(ii) installation of Defibrillator in public spaces as directed 
by the competent authority; or 


(iii) participation preparedness in public emergency 
initiatives, for such duration and in such manner as may be 
prescribed: 


Provided that each day of continued non-compliance after notice shall 
constitute a separate offence: 


Provided further that the penalty under this section shall be without 
prejudice to any civil liability arising from wilful obstruction of emergency 
medical assistance. 


[PART I— 


Permission of 
access and non- 
obstruction. 


Funding under 
corporate social 
responsibility. 


Nodal authority. 


Inspection and 
enforcement. 


Penalties for 
non-compliance. 


SEC. 2] 


Central 21. 
Government 

to provide 

funds. 

Power to 22. 


make rules. 


Act not in 23. 
derogation of 
any other law. 


Power to 24. 
remove 
difficulties. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 257 


CHAPTER VIII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds, from time to 
time, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both the 
Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of 
any other law for the time being in force. 


If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may be 
necessary for removing the difficulty. 


258 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Sudden Cardiac Arrest (SCA) is a leading cause of preventable deaths in the 
country, resulting in an estimated 7-15 lakh fatalities annually. Survival from SCA 
depends on intervention within minutes, as irreversible brain injury begins within four to 
six minutes, and the probability of survival declines sharply with every minute of delay 
in defibrillation. India’s emergency response framework, which remains predominantly 
ambulance and hospital centric, is structurally incapable of addressing this time-critical 
challenge due to traffic congestion, infrastructure constraints and delayed response times. 


India bears a disproportionate burden of premature cardiac mortality owing to the 
“Asian Indian phenotype”, characterised by early-onset cardiovascular disease. More than 
sixty per cent of heart-related deaths occur in the working-age population, with a rising 
incidence among individuals aged 30-50 years. Survival outcomes for out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest in India remain extremely poor, largely due to the absence of immediate 
bystander intervention and on-site defibrillation. 


Public access to Automated External Defibrillators (AEDs) and population-level 
life support training in India is critically inadequate. Bystander cardiopulmonary 
resuscitation rates are low, and fear of legal harassment continues to deter emergency 
assistance in the absence of comprehensive statutory protection. This gap results in 
avoidable loss of life during the Golden Hour. 


The economic cost of inaction is substantial. Premature cardiovascular deaths 
impose significant productivity losses on the national economy, while the cost of 
deploying AEDs and training citizens is minimal in comparison. Early intervention also 
reduces long-term disability and catastrophic healthcare expenditure. 


The Bill seeks to establish a national emergency survival ecosystem by mandating 
AED installation in high-footfall public places and large residential and workspaces; 
creating a geo tagged National AED Registry integrated with digital emergency 
platforms; introducing mandatory CPR and AED training in secondary education and for 
commercial drivers; codifying Good Samaritan immunity; and aligning corporate social 
responsibility with public emergency health infrastructure. 


The Bill recognises emergency survival during the Golden Hour as a core public 
health obligation of the State and an operational extension of the constitutional right to 
life, with the objective of transforming citizens and public spaces into active participants 
in saving lives. 


Hence, this Bill. 


SUJEET KUMAR. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 259 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 9 of the Bill provides for establishment of a geo-tagged National 
Defibrillator Registry. Clause 21 provides that the Central Government shall provide 
requisite funds for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. However, at this juncture, it is difficult to estimate the actual expenditure 
likely to be involved. 


260 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying 
out the purposes of the Act. Clause 24 provides that the Central Government may make 
such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for removing any difficulty in giving effect 
to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules will relate to matters of procedure and administrative details only, the 
delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 261 


Bill No. IV of 2026 


A Bill to provide for the social security, welfare, regulation of employment 
conditions, dignity of labour, and protection of the rights of domestic 
workers; and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 


CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Domestic Workers (Social Security and Short title and 
Welfare) Act, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be 
appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision. 


Definitions. 


Constitution 
of Domestic 
Workers 
Welfare 


Boards. 


262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires— 


(a) “appropriate Government” means in the case of a State, the 
Government of that State and in all other cases, the Central Government; 


(b) “Board” means the Domestic Workers Welfare Board 
constituted under section 3; 


(c) “domestic work” means work performed in or for a household, 
including but not limited to cleaning, cooking, washing, care giving, 
childcare, elder care, gardening, driving for household purposes, and such 
other work as may be notified; 


(d) “domestic worker” means any person engaged for remuneration, 
whether in cash or kind, directly or through an agency, in domestic work 
in a household, whether on a full-time, part-time, live-in, live-out, 
temporary or permanent basis, and includes migrant domestic workers, 
but excludes any member of the employer’s family; 


(e) “employer” means any individual, household, or association of 
households that employs or engages a domestic worker, directly or 
through an agency; 


(f) “Fund” means the Domestic Workers Welfare Fund constituted 
under section 8. 


(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
and 


(h) “welfare scheme” means any scheme formulated and notified 
under section 9 for providing benefits relating to health, maternity, old 
age, disability, accident, housing, education, skill development or any 
other social security measure. 


CHAPTER II 
SOCIAL SECURITY 


3. (1) The appropriate Government within their territorial jurisdiction, shall, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute a State/Union territory 
Domestic Workers Welfare Board in each State and Union territory 
within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, to carry out 
such functions as may be prescribed. 


(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue 
or be sued. 


(3) The Board shall consist of the following, to be appointed by the 
appropriate Government — 


(a) a Chairperson who shall be a social worker with fifteen 
years of experience in the field of welfare of workers; 


(b) five members representing various departments of 
appropriate Government, as may be prescribed; 


(c) two members representing registered domestic workers’ 
unions or associations; 


(d) two members representing employers; and 


(e) two members of civil society having expertise in issues 
relating to labour matters. 


(4) Not less than one-third of the members of the Board shall be women. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 263 


(5) The Board shall have office in each district of the State or Union 
territory, as the case may be. 


(6) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salaries and other 
allowances payable to the Chairperson and other members of the Board, 
shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(7) The Board shall have such number of officers and employees as may 
be prescribed. 


(8) The terms and conditions of appointment and the salary and 
allowances payable to the officers and employees of the Board shall be as 
such as may be prescribed. 


(9) The Board shall have powers to regulate its own procedure. 
CHAPTER III 
REGISTRATION, RIGHTS AND CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT 


4. (1) Every domestic worker shall have the right to be registered under this Act Registration 
with the Board having territorial jurisdiction, either individually or through an enn 
organization, union, in such manner and form, as may be prescribed. employers. 


(2) Every employer engaging a domestic worker shall be required to register 
with the Board having territorial jurisdiction, in such manner as may be 
prescribed. 


(3) The Board shall issue a unique identity card to the domestic worker on 
registration, which shall be transferable to other Boards constituted under this 
Act. 


(4) Registration under this Act shall not be denied on the ground of lack of 
documentary proof of residence or employment. 


(5) The renewal of registration of domestic workers shall be at such intervals 
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed. 


5. (1) No employer shall engage a domestic worker without entering into a Written 
written contract, specifying— cs ~ 

(a) the nature and scope of work to be performed; employment. 

(b) the hours of work including rest intervals; 

(c) the wages payable and mode of payment thereof; 

(d) the leave entitlements; 


(e) the duration of employment and conditions governing 
termination of employment; and 


(f) such other matters as may be prescribed: 
Provided that every domestic worker shall be entitled to— 
(a) a weekly day of rest; 
(b) fifteen days of leave with wages in a calendar year; 


(c) leave on such national and festival holidays, as may be notified; 
and 


(d) humane working hours and adequate rest intervals, consistent 
with human dignity and health, as may be notified. 


(2) No domestic worker shall be subjected to any form of physical, verbal, 
sexual or economic abuse, or any forced or bonded labour, or to any 
discriminatory practices. 


264 


Wages = and 6. 


equal 
remuneration. 


Central 7. 


Government 
to formulate 
policy 
framework. 


Domestic 8. 


Workers 
Welfare 
Fund. 


Welfare 9, 


schemes. 


Inspection 10. 


and 
monitoring. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(1) No domestic worker shall be paid wages less than the minimum rates of 
wages notified by the appropriate Government for different categories of 
domestic work. 


(2) There shall be no discrimination in the payment of wages on the ground of 
gender, caste, religion, place of origin or any other status of the domestic 
worker. 


(3) Wages shall be paid to a domestic worker at least once every month, either 
in cash or through bank transfer or digital mode, with proper records 
maintained by the employer, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
formulate a policy and model framework for implementation of the provisions 
of this Act in States and Union territories. 


CHAPTER IV 
WELFARE FUND AND SCHEMES 


(1) There shall be constituted by the appropriate Government a Fund to be 
called the State/Union territory Domestic Workers Welfare Fund and there 
shall be credited thereto— 


(a) grants and loans made by the appropriate Government; 


(b) contributions or cess from employers registered with the Board 
having territorial jurisdiction, as may be prescribed; 


(c) amounts received from fines imposed under this Act, as may be 
apportioned by the Central Government; and 


(d) donations, contributions, or assistance from any lawful source. 


(2) The Fund shall be utilized exclusively for the welfare and social security of 
registered domestic workers in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(1) The Central Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette 
formulate welfare schemes for domestic workers, which shall include, but not 
limited to — 


(a) health and accident insurance; 

(b) maternity benefits and childcare support; 

(c) old age pension and disability pension; 

(d) assistance in case of injury or death during employment; 


(e) housing, education scholarships for children, and skill 
upgradation; 


(f) legal aid and counselling services; 
(g) any other matter as may be prescribed. 


(2) It shall be the responsibility of the Boards constituted under this Act to 
ensure the implementation of the welfare schemes, as may be notified under 
sub-section (1). 


CHAPTER V 
REGULATION, INSPECTION AND GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL 


(1) The appropriate Government shall, by notification, appoint or 
designate inspectors or facilitators for the purposes of this Act possessing 
such qualifications and experience as may be prescribed. 


(2) The inspections of households shall be undertaken only upon receipt of 
a complaint and subject to such safeguards, as may be prescribed, in a 
manner that balances enforcement with the right to privacy. 


45 of 2023. 


SEC. 2] 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 265 


(3) Inspectors or facilitators shall have the power to examine records, 
inquire into complaints, and issue directions or recommend corrective 
measures in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 


(1) The Board shall establish a toll-free helpline and one or more 
facilitation centres in each district, and shall establish a time-bound 
grievance redressal system. 


(2) The facilitation centre shall receive complaints, relating to non- 
payment of wages, abuse, harassment, wrongful termination, or denial of 
benefits, on behalf of the Board, from registered domestic workers, in 
written or electronic mode, in such manner or form as may be prescribed. 


(3) The complaints received under sub-section (2) shall be inquired 
into and disposed of within a period of thirty days from the date of its 
receipt. 


(4) The Board may, in the first instance, attempt conciliation and, 
wherever necessary, refer cases to the appropriate authority or a court of 
competent jurisdiction for such action as deemed fit. 


CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 


(1) Any employer who contravenes the provisions of this Act or the rules and 
regulations made there under shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three months or with fine which may extend up to rupees 
fifty thousand or with both. 


(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall prevent the application of relevant 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or of any other law for the 
time being in force, in cases involving abuse, trafficking, or forced labour. 


CHAPTER VII 


MISCELLANEOUS 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by the 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide requisite funds to the State 
Governments for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and 
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor- 
General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure 
incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person 
appointed by him in connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board 
under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and, in 
particular shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the 
offices of the Board under this Act. 


The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities 
during the previous financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the appropriate 
Government. 


The appropriate Government shall cause the annual report together with a 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, and 
the reasons for the non acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and 
the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, 
before each House of Parliament or the State Legislature, as the case may be. 


Grievance 
redressal 


mechanism. 


Offences and 


penalties. 


Central 


Government 


to provide 
funds. 


Accounts and 


audit. 


Annual 
report. 


Annual report 
and audit report 


to be 
before 
Parliament 
State 
legislature. 


laid 


or 


Power of 
Central 
Government 

to make rules. 


Power of 
Boards to 
make 
regulations. 


Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament or 
State 
legislature. 


Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 


266 


17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


22. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


The Boards may, with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this 
Act and the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
after it is made before each House of Parliament or state legislature as the case 
may be, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, the House or both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form 
or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule or regulation. 


No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the appropriate 
Government, the Board or any person acting under its authority for anything 
done in good faith under this Act. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
save as otherwise provided. 


If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with this Act as appear necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 267 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Domestic workers constitute one of the largest segments of the unorganized workforce 
and play an indispensable role in sustaining households and enabling broader economic 
participation, particularly of women. Despite their significant contribution, domestic workers 
largely remain outside the ambit of formal labour protection and social security laws. They are 
often subjected to low wages, excessive working hours, lack of written contracts, absence of 
social security, vulnerability to abuse and harassment, and denial of basic dignity and labour 
rights. The nature of domestic work, performed within private households, renders domestic 
workers particularly vulnerable to exploitation and makes enforcement of existing labour laws 
difficult. While certain welfare schemes exist, their coverage is fragmented, non-uniform, and 
largely dependent on voluntary registration, resulting in limited reach and effectiveness. 


A separate national law for domestic workers is essential due to the unique nature of 
employment of the domestic workers i.e., part-time / full-time, live-in and live-out. There are 
a lot of complexities in the employment of the domestic workers, and therefore, these workers 
are not squarely covered under the new Code of Wages 2019 or other labour laws. There is an 
asymmetric relationship between the employers and employees in case of domestic workers. 
Last year, the Supreme Court has given a direction to the Central Government for having a 
separate law for domestic workers. The Court took note of the vulnerability of domestic 
workers because of lack of regulations. Though some States do have regulations but the Court 
noted that there is a need for a national law applicable to all States. 


It is therefore considered necessary to enact a comprehensive legislation to recognize 
domestic workers as workers, ensure their registration, regulate their conditions of 
employment, provide for minimum wages and decent working conditions, and establish a 
dedicated institutional mechanism for social security and welfare. The Bill seeks to create a 
Domestic Workers Welfare Board and a Welfare Fund for providing health insurance, 
maternity benefits, pension, skill development, accident compensation, and other welfare 
measures. It also provides for grievance redressal, inspection with due regard to household 
privacy, and penalties for violations. 


The proposed legislation is aligned with the constitutional mandate of social justice 
under articles 14, 15, 16, 21, 23, 38, 39 and 43 of the Constitution, and is consistent with 
international labour standards, including the ILO Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 
189). The enactment of this law will be a significant step towards ensuring dignity, security, 
and justice for domestic workers. 


Hence, this Bill. 


A. 12. SINGH. 


268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 3 of the Bill provides for constitution of Domestic Workers Welfare 
Boards to provide social security to domestic workers as well as appointment of 
Chairperson and Members of the Boards along with appointment of officers and staff 
for efficient discharge of its functions. Clause 10 provides for appointment of 
Inspectors for the purposes of this Bill. Clause 11 provides for establishment of toll-free 
helpline and facilitation centres in each district. Clause 13 provides that the Central 
Government shall provide adequate funds to the State Governments for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 


The Bill, therefore if enacted, will involve expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of India. It is estimated that a sum of rupees five hundred crores will be required 
as recurring expenditure. Non-recurring expenditure to the tune of rupees fifty crores is 
likely to be involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 269 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 18 empowers the Domestic Workers 
Welfare Boards to make regulations. Clause 22 empowers the Central Government 
to make such provisions through an order for removing any difficulty that might 
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Bill. 


As the rules or regulations or orders will relate to matters of procedural and 
administrative detail only, the delegation of legislative power is of a normal 
character. 


270 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


Bill No. V of 2026 


A Bill to enforce the fundamental right of women to equal pay for work 
of equal value; to prescribe objective standards for job evaluation to 
eliminate gender bias in remuneration; to establish the National 
Authority for Pay Parity of Women with distinct investigative and 
adjudicatory powers; to prohibit systemic wage 
discrimination and non-transparent pay 
practices; and for matters 
connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic 
of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Shakti Samman (Pay Parity for Women) Short title and 
Act, 2026. commencement. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be 
appointed for different classes of establishments based on employee count 
or turnover. 


Definitions. 


SEC. 2] 


2s 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “applicant” means any person who has formally expressed 
interest for employment against a specific vacancy or otherwise in an 
establishment by submitting an application, which may include a 
resume or a prescribed form; 


(b) “audit” means the annual Pay Parity Audit conducted under 
section 10; 


(c) “Authority” means the National Authority for Pay Parity of 
Women constituted under section 6; 


(d) “employee” means a person employed at a workplace for 
any work on regular, temporary, ad hoc or daily wage basis, either 
directly or through an agent, including a contractor, with or, without 
the knowledge of the principal employer, on a remuneration, whether 
the terms of employment are express or implied and includes a co- 
worker, a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice or called 
by any other such name; 


(e) "employer" means a person who employs, whether directly 
or through any person, or on his behalf, or on behalf of any person, 
one or more employees in his establishment and where the 
establishment is carried on by any department of the Central 
Government or the State Government, the authority specified, by the 
head of such department, in this behalf or where no authority is so 
specified, the head of the department and in relation to an 
establishment carried on by a local authority, the chief executive of 
that authority, and includes, — 


(i) in relation to an establishment which is a factory, 
the occupier of the factory; 


(ii) in relation to mine, the owner of the mine or agent 
or manager having requisite qualification under the law for the 
time being in force and appointed by the owner or agent of the 
mine as such; 


(iii) in relation to any other establishment, the person 
who, or the authority which has ultimate control over the 
affairs of the establishment and where the said affairs are 
entrusted to a manager or managing director, such manager or 
managing director; 


(iv) contractor; and 
(v) legal representative of a deceased employer; 
(f) “establishment” includes: 


(i) any office or department of the Government 
or a local authority; 


(ii) any factory, mine, plantation, or commercial 
establishment; 


(iii) any company, firm, cooperative society, or 
trust; and 


(iv) gig-economy platforms and aggregators 
employing or contracting more than ten individuals; 


(g) “pay” or “wage” means all remuneration whether by way 


of salaries, allowances or otherwise, expressed in terms of money or 
capable of being so expressed which would, if the terms of employment, 
express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to a person employed in 
respect of his employment or of work done in such employment, and 
includes,— 


271 


272 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(i) basic pay; 

(ii) dearness allowance; and 

(iii) retaining allowance, if any, 
but does not include such allowances or compensation, as may be 
prescribed. 


(h) “Portal” means the Equal Pay Digital Compliance Portal 
established under section 12; 


(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this 
Act; 


(i) “systemic discrimination” means a pattern of practice, 
policy, or class-wide disparity where the average remuneration of 
women is lower than that of men for the same job category without 
lawful justification; 


(k) “work of equal value” means work that is determined to be 
equivalent based on the composite assessment of the following four 
factors, namely: 

(i) skill, which includes the required knowledge, 
qualifications, and experience; 

(ii) effort, which includes the physical, mental, and 
emotional exertion required; 

(iii) responsibility, _ which includes the 
accountability for people, resources, and decision- 
making; and 

(iv) working conditions, which includes the 
physical and psychological environment of the work. 

CHAPTER II 
SUBSTANTIVE RIGHTS AND PROHIBITED PRACTICES 


(1) No employer shall, in respect of any woman employee, grant pay at a 
rate less favorable than the rate at which pay is granted to a male employee 
for performing:— 


(a) the same work; or 
(b) work of equal value. 


(2) In determining whether work is of equal value, the employer shall not 
take into account: — 


(a) the job title or designation; 


(b) the time of day at which the work is performed, unless a 
shift allowance is uniformly payable to all employees; or 


(c) the bargaining power of the employee at the time of hiring. 


(1) In any proceeding under this Act, the burden shall initially lie upon the 
complainant to establish a prima facie case of pay disparity for work of 
equal value. 


(2) Where a prima facie case is established under sub-section (४), the 
burden of proof shall shift to the employer to prove that the difference in 
pay is based on a bona fide factor and not on the gender of the employee. 


Explanation. — For the purposes of sub-section (2), a “bona 
fide factor” shall be: — 


(a) objective, reasonable and directly related to the job 
including specific seniority system or merit system or measuring 
remuneration by production quantity or quality; 


Right to equal 


pay. 


Burden 
proof. 


of 


Prohibited 
practices. 


Constitution of 
the National 
Authority for 
Pay Parity of 
Women. 


SEC. 2] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(b) applied uniformly and consistently to all employees; and 
(c) not derived from or tainted by historical gender bias. 
No employer shall, directly or indirectly:— 


(a) require any applicant to make the disclosure of prior pay 
history as a mandatory precondition for interviewing, considering, or 
hiring such applicant: 


Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent an employer from 
considering or verifying pay history if such information is voluntarily 
disclosed by the applicant without coercion, for the purpose of negotiating 
a pay higher than the initial offer; 


(b) require an employee to sign a waiver or contract that 
prohibits the employee from disclosing or discussing the wages of 
the employee with others; 


(c) classify or channel women employees into specific job 
titles which are substantially similar in skill, effort, responsibility and 
working conditions to male-dominated titles but are paid less; or 


(d) discharge, demote, or otherwise discriminate against an 
employee because such employee has inquired about, discussed, or 
disclosed comparative pay rates. 


CHAPTER III 
THE NATIONAL AUTHORITY FOR PAY PARITY OF WOMEN 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute an Authority to be known as the National 
Authority for Pay Parity of Women to exercise the powers conferred 
on, and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession 
and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name 
sue and be sued. 


(3) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi and the 
Authority may, with the prior approval of the Central Government, 
establish Regional Offices at Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai and 
Bengaluru. 


(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and four Full-time 
Members to be appointed by the Central Government on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the 
purpose, comprising of:— 


(a) the Chief Justice of India or a Judge of the Supreme Court 
nominated by him — Chairperson; 


(b) the Union Minister for Women and Child Development - 
Member; and 


(c) the Union Minister for Labour and Employment - 
Member. 


(5) The Chairperson of the Authority shall be a retired Judge of the 
Supreme Court or retired Chief Justice of a High Court. 


(6) The Members of the Authority shall be from amongst persons of 
ability, integrity and standing, who have special knowledge of and 
professional experience of not less than twenty years in law, labour 
economics, industrial relations, or gender studies. 


273 


274 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(7) Not less than three members of the Authority, including the 
Chairperson shall be women. 


(8) The term of office of, the salaries and allowances payable to and 
other terms and conditions of service of, resignation by and removal 
of the Chairperson and members shall be such as may be prescribed. 


(9) The Central Government shall provide the Authority with such 
officers and other employees as may be necessary for the efficient 
performance of its functions under this Act. 


(10) The method of recruitment, salaries and allowances payable to, 
and the other terms and conditions of service of, the officers and other 
employees, so appointed for the purposes of the Authority shall be 
such as may be prescribed. 


7. The Authority shall perform the following functions, namely:— Functions — of 
the Authority. 
(a) enforce the provisions of this Act relating to pay parity for 


women; 


(b) inquire into and adjudicate complaints of gender-based 
wage discrimination; 


(c) conduct suo motu investigations into systemic wage 
discrimination; 


(d) prescribe objective methodologies for determining work of 
equal value; 


(e) monitor compliance through audits and digital reporting 
systems; 


(f) advise the Central Government on gender pay equality 
policies; 


(g) promote awareness, research and capacity-building 
programmes on equal pay; and 


(h) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 


8. (1) The Authority shall, for the purposes of any inquiry or investigation Powers of 
under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a Civil Court under ey ge 
C Gan है 3 mae Investigation. 
5 of 1908 the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the 


following matters, namely:— 


(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and 
examining him on oath; 


(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents, 
including digital payroll records and internal emails; 


(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; and 


(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any 
court or office. 


(2) The Authority shall have the power to initiate swo motu investigations 
if: 
(a) data from the annual audit under section 10 reveal a gender 
pay gap exceeding five per cent. in any job category; or 


(b) it receives credible information regarding systemic pay 
discrimination in an industry. 


Power of 
search and 
seizure. 


Mandatory 
Pay Parity 
Audit. 


Transparency 
in recruitment 
and posting 
processes. 


Equal Pay 
Digital 
Compliance 
Portal. 


Filing of 
complaints. 


SEC. 2] 


9. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 275 


(1) Where the Authority has reason to believe that an employer is 
suppressing evidence of wage discrimination, it may authorize an officer 
not below the rank of Director to:— 


(a) enter and search any building or place where the 
establishment is functioning; 


(b) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, or 
almirah where wage records are kept; and 


(c) seize any such books of account, wage registers, other 
documents, or electronic records or devices. 


(2) The provisions of the, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, 
relating to search and seizure shall, so far as may be, apply to search and 
seizure under this section. 


CHAPTERIV 
OBLIGATIONS OF EMPLOYERS 


(1) Every establishment employing fifty or more employees shall conduct 
an annual Pay Parity Audit for a calendar year, in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed, for the purpose of assessing compliance with the 
provisions of this Act relating to equal pay for work of equal value. 


(2) The audit shall calculate:-— 
(a) the mean and median gender pay gap in respect of hourly 
pay; 
(b) the mean and median gender bonus gap; and 


(c) the proportion of men and women employees in each 
quartile of the pay structure. 


(3) The audit report for a calendar year shall be submitted to the Authority 
in such electronic or other form as may be prescribed and published on the 
website of establishment on or before the ३317 of March of the succeeding 
year. 


Every employer shall, in every notification of advertisement for 
recruitment or posting order, disclose the pay scale or salary range 
applicable to the position and any failure to do so shall render the 
recruitment process or the posting order voidable at the instance of any 
applicant or any employee or the Authority. 


(1) The Authority shall establish and maintain an Equal Pay Digital 
Compliance Portal, in such manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Without in anyway affecting the generality of sub-section (1), the 
Portal shall provide for: 


(a) electronic submission of audit reports; 
(b) automated compliance monitoring; 


(c) artificial intelligence-based detection of wage anomalies 
and systemic discrimination; and 


(9) secure electronic filing and tracking of complaints. 
CHAPTER V 
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL AND ADJUDICATION 


Any aggrieved woman employee or applicant, or a registered trade union 
or civil society organisation duly authorized by such employee or 
applicant, may file a complaint electronically through the Portal to the 
Authority in such form as may be prescribed. 


46 of 2023 


276 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(1) The Authority shall make efforts to resolve any complaint filed under 
this Act through conciliation within thirty days of date of its receipt. 


(2) Where conciliation fails, the Authority shall commence a formal 
inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed and such inquiry shall be 
concluded within ninety days from the date of commencement of such 
inquiry. 

(3) Pending the final disposal of the complaint, if the Authority is satisfied 
that the complainant is suffering significant financial hardship or 
harassment, it may direct the employer to pay provisional wages equal to 
the claimed disparity as interim relief or pass any order, including interim 
stay on transfer of the complainant, as may be deemed appropriate. 


(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Authority under this Act, may 
prefer an appeal to the High Court having jurisdiction, within sixty days 
from the date of communication of such order. 


(2) No appeal by an employer against any order of the Authority shall be 
entertained unless the employer deposits seventy five per cent. of the 
compensation amount awarded by the Authority with the Registrar of the 
High Court. 


CHAPTER VI 
PENALTIES, COMPENSATION AND FUND 


(1) Where an employer fails to conduct the audit as required under this 
Act or publish or disclose transparency data in the manner prescribed, 
shall be liable to the following penalties, namely:- 


(a) for the first contravention, a fine which may extend to five 
lakh rupees; and 


(b) for subsequent contravention, a fine which may extend to ten 
lakh rupees per day of default. 


(2) Where an employer contravenes the provisions of sections 3 and 5 of 
this Act, such employer shall be liable to:- 


(a) the penalty of twice the total wage differential calculated 
from the date, on which such disparity began; and 


(b) a fine of up to one per cent of the total annual turnover of the 
establishment for the preceding financial year. 


(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall 
be established for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be called the 
Gender Justice Fund. 


(2) There shall be credited to the Gender Justice Fund all sums 
realised by way of penalties imposed and collected under section 16, 
including penalties calculated with reference to the turnover of an 
establishment. 


(3) The Gender Justice Fund shall be utilised for the purposes of— 


(a) providing legal aid, assistance and support to women 
employees for the enforcement of rights under this Act; 


(b) undertaking or supporting research, surveys and data 
collection relating to gender-based wage differentials and 
employment practices; 


(c) conducting awareness, education and capacity-building 
programmes for employers, employees and other stakeholders; 
and 


(d) such other purposes as may be prescribed. 


Conciliation 
and inquiry. 


Appeals. 


Penalties. 


Gender Justice 
Fund. 


Compensation 
to the 
employee. 


Offences by 
companies. 


Central 
Government 
to provide 
funds. 


Accounts and 
audit. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


In addition to penalty that may be imposed under this Act, the Authority 
shall, by order, direct the employer to pay the aggrieved employee:— 


(a) the difference in pay for the entire period of employment, 
up to a maximum of six years preceding the date of complaint; 


(b) a simple interest calculated at the rate of twelve per cent. 
per annum on the difference in wages; and 


(c) compensation for emotional distress suffered and legal 
costs incurred by the employee, if any, which shall not be less than 
two lakh rupees as damages. 


(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every person 
who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of that part of the business of 
the company as well as the company, shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 


(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (/) shall render any such person 
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly under this act, if 
he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he 
had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (/), where an 
offence under this act has been committed by a company and it is proved 
that the offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or 
is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall hold an independent 
director or a non-executive director of a company who is not involved in 
the actual decision making, liable for such offence. 

Explanation.—for the purposes of this section, the expressions— 

(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes— 
(i) a firm; and 


(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals 
whether incorporated or not; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to— 
(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm; and 


(ii) any association of persons or a body of 
individuals, means any member controlling its affairs thereof. 


CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 


The Central Government shall, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide adequate funds to the 
Authority, for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 


(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified by him and any 
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General. 


277 


278 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any person appointed by 
him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority under 
this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
generally has in connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in 
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Authority. 


(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by the Comptroller and 
Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf, 
together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the 
Central Government by the Authority. 


22. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time as may be Annual Report. 
prescribed, an annual report of its activities and submit the same to the 
Central Government. 


23. The Central Government shall cause the annual report together with a Annual report 
memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained therein, i ee esa 
in so far as they relate to the Central Government, and the reasons for the before 


nonacceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations and the audit Parliament. 
report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are received, before 
each House of Parliament. 


24. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, Power to make 
make rules for carrying out the other provisions of this Act. mules: 


(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses 
agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule. 


25. The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything Act to have 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in ee 


force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than 
this Act. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 279 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Constitution of India, through Articles 14, 15, and 39(d), envisages a society 
founded on equality and justice, explicitly mandating "equal pay for equal work" for 
both men and women. Despite these constitutional guarantees, the gender pay gap in 
India remains a persistent and systemic challenge. Economic data indicates that women 
continue to earn significantly less than men for work of comparable value, a disparity 
exacerbated by occupational segregation, lack of transparency in pay structures, and 
the historical undervaluation of work traditionally performed by women. 


The existing legal framework has faced challenges in enforcement due to the 
narrow interpretation of "same work or work of a similar nature," which fails to 
account for roles that are different in description but equivalent in value. Furthermore, 
the burden of proving discrimination has traditionally rested heavily on the employee, 
often rendering the pursuit of justice prohibitively difficult for women facing wage 
disparities. 


The Shakti Samman (Pay Parity for Women) Bill, 2026 seeks to bridge this gap 
by introducing a robust, modern, and enforceable legislative framework. The Bill 
adopts the internationally recognized standard of "Work of Equal Value," allowing for 
a scientific comparison of dissimilar jobs based on skill, effort, responsibility, and 
working conditions. This shift ensures that women in female-dominated sectors are not 
penalized for the nature of their work. 


The principal objects of the Bill are as follows:— 


(a) to establish the National Authority for Pay Parity of Women as a 
specialized regulatory body with the powers of a Civil Court to monitor 
compliance, conduct audits, and adjudicate disputes; 


(b) to shift the burden of proof onto the employer once a prima facie case 
of pay disparity is established, thereby correcting the procedural imbalance in 
wage litigation; 


(c) to mandate transparency through annual Pay Parity Audits , ensuring 
that wage discrimination is identified and corrected proactively rather than 
reactively; 


(d) to prohibit restrictive practices such as the mandatory disclosure of 
salary history and pay secrecy clauses, which perpetuate historical wage gaps; 
and 


(e) to provide for deterrent penalties and a compensation mechanism that 
offers genuine restitution to aggrieved women, including the recovery of arrears 
with interest. 


This legislative measure is a step towards fulfilling India’s international 
obligations under the International Labour Organization (ILO) Equal Remuneration 
Convention, 1951 (No. 100), and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). It recognizes that economic empowerment 
is central to gender justice and that true equality cannot be achieved without pay parity. 


Hence, this Bill. 
KARTIKEYA SHARMA. 


280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


Clause 6 provides for constitution of the National Authority for Pay Parity of 
Women, establishment of its head office and regional offices, its composition, salaries 
and allowances payable and other terms and conditions of services of its members and 
officers and staff. Clause 7 provides for promotion of awareness, research and capacity- 
building programmes on equal remuneration. Clause 12 provides for establishment and 
maintenance of an Equal Pay Digital Compliance Portal. Clause 17 provides for 
establishment of the Gender Justice Fund and Clause 20 provides Central Government to 
provide funds to the Authority for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 


The Bill, therefore, if enacted, would involve expenditure, both of recurring and 
non-recurring nature, from the Consolidated Fund of India. However, it is difficult, at 
this juncture, to estimate the exact expenditure likely to be involved. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 281 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act, including matters relating to the methodology for determining 
“Work of Equal Value,” the format and manner of conducting Pay Parity Audits, and the 
procedures governing inquiries, investigations, and search and seizure operations by the 
Authority. 


As the matters in respect of which rules may be made relate to matters of detail only, 
the delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 


282 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


XXXII 


Bill No. VI of 2026 


A Bill to provide for the identification, designation, and protection of critical 
infrastructure of strategic importance, to establish a framework for its resilience 
through technological integration, to impose strict liability and accountability 
on parties responsible for failure of, or loss of lives due to 
defects in the critical infrastructure; and for 
matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. 

BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of 
India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 


1. (1) This Act may be called the Critical Infrastructure (Resilience, Protection 
and Accountability) Act, 2026. 


(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint. 


Short title and 
commencement. 


Definitions. 


SEC. 2] 


2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 


(a) “Committee” means the Critical Infrastructure Oversight 
Committee constituted under section 6; 


(b) "critical infrastructure" means an asset, project, facility, system, or 
part thereof, whether physical or virtual, as may be specified under 
section 3; 


(c) “Dashboard” means National Real-Time Critical Infrastructure 
Monitoring Dashboard as established under section 9; 


(d) “defect liability period” means the period specified in the contract, 
concession agreement, or other binding arrangement, commencing from 
the date of completion, commissioning, or handover of a critical 
infrastructure, during which the contractor, sub-contractor, 
concessionaire, vendor, technology provider, or any other party 
responsible for the works, goods, or services, shall remain liable to 
remedy, repair, replace, or rectify any defect, deficiency, or failure 
arising from design, workmanship, materials, or performance, at no 
additional cost to the Nodal Ministry of the critical infrastructure; 


(e) "Digital Twin" means a dynamic, virtual representation of a 
physical critical infrastructure that uses real-time data to enable 
understanding, learning, and reasoning regarding the performance and 
lifecycle of the critical infrastructure; 


(f) "Nodal Ministry" means the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having administrative and financial control over the specific 
critical infrastructure; 


(g) "party" means any individual or entity engaged in the lifecycle of 
the critical infrastructure, and shall include following: 


(i) the contractor, the primary individual or entity executing the 
works; 


(ii) the sub-contractor, any individual or entity to whom part of 
the work is delegated; 


(iii) concessionaire, the holder of a concession for public-private 
partnership projects; 


(iv) Special Purpose Vehicle, a subsidiary created for the specific 
project; 


(v) Joint Venture, a commercial enterprise undertaken jointly by 
two or more parties; 


(vi) vendor, the supplier of materials or components; 


(vii) the technology provider, any individual or entity providing 
software, hardware, or integration services; and 


(viii) the consultant, any individual or entity providing 
architectural, structural, or management advice. 


(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 


(i) “Protocol” means Critical Infrastructure Safety Protocol as 
provided under section 5; and 


(j) “Registry” means National Critical Infrastructure Registry as 
provided under section 4. 


283 


284 


3. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


CHAPTER II 
DESIGNATION AND REGISTRY 


The Central Government. may by notification in the Official Gazette specify 
critical infrastructure, satisfying one or more of the following criteria: 


(i) financial threshold: the total commissioning cost or replacement 
value exceeds rupees one thousand crore; or 


(ii) beneficiary threshold: serves a daily user base or beneficiary 
population exceeding one million individuals; or 


(iii) strategic importance: the compromise, loss, or failure would 
result in debilitating impact on national security, defence capabilities, or 
national sovereignty. 


Provided that such notification shall be issued after consultation with 
the State Government or local authority, where such Government or 
authority is a partner in the development, operation, or maintenance of 
the critical infrastructure. 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
establish, maintain and operate a Registry to be known as the National 
Critical Infrastructure Registry. 


(2) The Central Government shall classify the critical infrastructure in the 
Registry into the following categories: 


(a) Tier 1, strategic and life-critical, the failure of which would 
pose an immediate threat to human life, public safety or national 
sovereignty, including but not limited to dams, nuclear installations and 
defence corridors; 


(b) Tier 2, economic and urban, the failure of which would cause 
massive disruption of economic activity or essential urban services, 
including but not limited to major expressways, ports, and power grids; 
and 


(c) any other category, as may be classified by the Central 
Government. 


(1) Every critical infrastructure shall be subject to, and governed by the 
Critical Infrastructure Safety Protocol, as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government. 


(2) The Central Government may, for the purposes of enforcement of the 
Protocol, make rules and lay down procedures, specifically to provide for: 


(a) the manner of conducting inquiries into complaints relating to 
safety violations or non-compliance; 


(b) the procedure for investigation of incidents, structural failures, 
or service disruptions involving critical infrastructure; and 


(c) the authorization of officers to institute suits, prosecutions, or 
other legal proceedings in competent courts on behalf of the Central 
Government. 


CHAPTER III 
GOVERNANCE AND OVERSIGHT 


(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute in every Nodal Ministry a Committee, to be known as the Critical 
Infrastructure Oversight Committee, to exercise the powers conferred upon, 
and to perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act. 


[PART I— 


Central 
Government to 
notify critical 
infrastructure. 


National 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Registry. 


Critical 
Infrastructure 
Safety 
Protocol. 


Constitution of 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Oversight 
Committee. 


Functions and 
powers of the 
Committee. 


Mandatory 
Digital Twin. 


National Real- 
Time Critical 
Infrastructure 
Monitoring 
Dashboard. 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(2) The Committee shall consist of: 


(a) the Union Minister in charge of the Nodal Ministry, who shall 
be the ex-officio Chairperson; and 


(b) the Secretary of the Nodal Ministry, who shall be the ex-officio 
Member-Secretary. 


(3) The Central Government may depute such number of officers and staff 
to the Committee, as may be required for its efficient functioning. 


7. The Committee shall exercise and perform the following functions: 


(a) monitor the security and resilience of the critical 
infrastructure; 


(b) review the compliance and performance of parties with respect 
to the Protocol; 


(c) initiate penal proceedings in the event of failure or non- 
compliance, as specified in section 10 of this Act; and 


(d) any other functions as assigned to it by the Central 
Government from time to time. 


CHAPTERIV 
TECHNOLOGICAL INTEGRATION 


8. (1) Every party responsible for the design, construction, operation or 
maintenance of any physical critical infrastructure shall possess a 
functioning Digital Twin. 


(2) The Digital Twin shall conform to such technical standards and 
specifications, as may be prescribed by the Committee, with the approval of 
the Central Government. 


(3) The Digital Twin shall be utilized for: 


(a) real-time monitoring of the structural health of the critical 
infrastructure; 


(b) stress testing of the critical infrastructure against simulated 
natural and man-made disasters; 


(c) predictive scheduling of maintenance of the critical 
infrastructure; and 


(d) any other purpose, as may be prescribed. 


9. (1) The Central Government shall establish a centralized and electronic 
National Real-Time Critical Infrastructure Monitoring Dashboard, in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 


(2) Every virtual critical infrastructure and Digital Twin shall act as a node, 
transmitting such data to the Dashboard, as may be prescribed. 


(3) The Dashboard shall be accessible to the Committee of the respective 
Nodal Ministry for the purpose of: 


(a) surveillance of health of the critical infrastructure; 


(b) facilitating data sharing between different Nodal Ministries to 
ensure systemic resilience and interoperability; and 


(c) supply data driver insights to the Central Government for 
future infrastructure planning. 


285 


286 


10. 


11. 


12. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART I— 


CHAPTER V 
LIABILITIES AND PENALTIES 


(1) Where there is a gross breach of a duty of care owed to its employees or 
to the members of the public by any party engaged in construction, 
operation or maintenance of critical infrastructure or there is structural 
failure of the critical infrastructure directly or indirectly attributable to 
design flaws, poor quality of construction or materials, or negligence,and 
such breach or failure results in loss of human life, the party shall be 
deemed to have committed the offence of corporate manslaughter under this 
Act. 


(2) The offence under sub-section (1) shall be cognizable and non-bailable. 


(3) Whoever is found guilty of corporate manslaughter shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years but 
which may extend to imprisonment for life. 


Whoever, being a party, by act of negligence, inefficiency, or willful delay 
causes disruption in the service of any critical infrastructure, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, 
or with fine, or with both. 


(1) Where an offence under section 10 has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, 
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of that part of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly. 


(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall render any such person liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly under this Act, if he 
proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence 
under this act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the 
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall hold an independent 
director or a non-executive director of a company who is not involved in the 
actual decision making, liable for such offence. 


Explanation.— for the purposes of this section, the expressions— 
(a) “company” means a body corporate, and includes— 
(i) a firm; and 


(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals 
whether incorporated or not; and 


(b) “director”, in relation to— 
(i) a firm, means a partner in the firm; 


(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, 
means any member controlling its affairs thereof. 


Offence 
corporate 


of 


manslaughter. 


Offence 
Service 


of 


Disruption and 


Negligence 


Offence 
companies 


by 


SEC. 2] 


Defect Liability 13. 
Period. 
Provisional 14. 


attachment रण 
assets. 


Criminal 15. 


Liability for 
Service 
Disruption and 
Negligence. 


Whistleblower 16. 


protection. 


Internal 17. 


Ombudsman. 


Annual Report. 18 


Power to make 19. 


rules. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Contract Act, 1872, 
the Defect Liability Period in respect of the critical infrastructure shall be 
twenty-five years from the date of commissioning. 


(2) The party shall be liable to repair or rebuild any defects arising in the 
critical infrastructure at their own cost during the Defect Liability Period. 


(3) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, 
the liability under this section of the transferor party prior to its merger, 
amalgamation or acquisition shall continue after such merger, amalgamation 
or acquisition. 


(1) In the event of a catastrophic failure of a Tier 1 critical infrastructure, 
the Central Government may, by order, direct the immediate freezing of the 
personal assets of the responsible Party or if the Party is a company, then of 
the members of its Board of Directors. 


(2) The attachment under sub-section (/) shall be effective prior to the 
commencement of any trial, inquiry or arbitration. 


(1) Whoever, being a public servant employed in a Nodal Ministry, by act 
of negligence, inefficiency, or willful delay causes disruption in the service 
of any critical infrastructure, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both. 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 218 of Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, no prior sanction shall be required for prosecution 
under this section in respect of offences relating to critical infrastructure. 


CHAPTER VI 
PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY 


(1) Any person who makes a disclosure of information relating to safety 
violations or corruption in the critical infrastructure, shall be entitled to 
protection under the provisions of the Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 
2014. 


(2) The identity of such whistleblowers shall be secured through encryption 
within the Dashboard. 


(1) The Nodal Ministry shall designate an officer of the rank of Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India as the internal Ombudsman. 


(2) The Ombudsman shall receive, inquire into, and redress public 


grievances relating to the safety and performance ofthe critical 
infrastructure. 

CHAPTER VII 

MISCELLANEOUS 


. The Committee shall prepare an annual report on the state of the critical 


infrastructure in the country and submit it to the Central Government which 
shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses of Parliament, within 
three months after the end of each financial year. 


(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. 


(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 


287 


9 of 1872 


46 of 2023 


17 of 2014 


288 


20. 


21. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC.2] 


session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both the Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be 
made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any 
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation. 


The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything 
therewith inconsistent contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 


If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to 
it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. 


Act to have 
overriding 
effect. 


Removal 
difficulties. 


of 


SEC. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 289 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The rapid urbanization and strategic development of India necessitates an 
infrastructure framework that is not only robust but resilient. In recent times, 
instances of infrastructure failure have highlighted casual attitude towards safety 
standards and asset longevity. Such negligence, when applied to critical 
infrastructure of strategic importance, amounts to a betrayal of public trust and 
national security. 


Existing legal frameworks treat infrastructure failure largely as a contractual 
dispute or a tort of negligence. This Bill seeks to shift the paradigm from "civil 
negligence" to "criminal accountability." It recognizes that the sabotage of critical 
infrastructure, whether through malice or gross incompetence, is an offense against 
the State. 


The Bill introduces a "Zero Cost" oversight mechanism by empowering 
existing Ministry officials rather than creating regulatory bodies. It mandates "Skin 
in the Game" for private contractors and public officials alike, ensuring that those 
who build and monitor our critical infrastructure are personally liable for their 
integrity. 


The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


KARTIKEYA SHARMA. 


290 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC.2] 


MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 


Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of the Bill. Clause 21 provides that the Central 
Government may make such provisions, by order, as may be necessary for 
removing any difficulty in giving effect to the provisions of this Bill. 


As the rules will relate to matters of detail only, the delegation of legislative 
power is of a normal character. 


P.C. MODY, 
Secretary-General. 


PUBLISHED BY THE SECRETARY-GENERAL, RAJYA SABHA, UNDER RULE 68 OF 
THE RULES OF PROCEDURE AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE COUNCIL 
OF STATES (RAJYA SABHA) 


MGIPMRND—570GI—6.2.2026. 


