रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003—05 REGD. NO. D. L. 0५) 04/0007/2003—05 


AI = VISTA 


Che Gazette of India 


GSH. -ST.We.-Al.-6092026-27666 
CG-DL-W-6092026-27666 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 
सं. 3i] नई दिल्‍ली, अगस्त 9---अगस्त 5, 2026, शनिवार/ श्रावण 8—sranr 24, 948 
No. 3 ] NEW DELHI, AUGUST 9—AUGUST 5, 2026, SATURDAY/ SHRAVAN 8- SHRAVAN 24, 948 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग पर--खण्ड ३----उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 


संचार मंत्रालय 
(डाक विभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 22 जून, 2026 
का.आ. (694.— केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 

संशोधित 987) के नियम 0 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 
कार्यालय महाप्रबंधक (वित्त), 
डाक लेखा कार्यालय , 
भोपाल- 462027 


[फा. सं. $-4047-7/2026-27. aT] 
मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 


5976 GI/2026 (8589) 


8590 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF COMMUNICATIONS 
(Department of Posts) 
New Delhi, the 22nd June, 2026 


S.O. 69.— In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule l0 of the Official Language (use for official Purposes of the 
Union) Rules 976 (as amended in 987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub-ordinate office of the 
Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi: - 


Office of the General Manager (Finance) 
Postal Accounts Office, 
Bhopal - 462027 
[F. No. E-07-/2026-OL] 


Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. (692.— केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 
संशोधित 987) के नियम 40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 


मुख्य पोस्टमास्टर जनरल का कार्यालय, 
जम्मू एवं कश्मीर सर्कल, 
श्रीनगर - 790 004, 
[फा. सं. €-7077-/2026-27.47.] 
मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 


New Delhi, the 22nd July, 2026 


S.O. 692.— In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official Purposes of the 
Union) Rules 976 (as amended in 987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub-ordinate office of the 
Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi: - 


Office of the Chief Postmaster General, 
Jammu & Kashmir Circle, 
Srinagar- 90 00] 
[F. No. E-07-/2026-OL] 
Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4693.--- केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 
संशोधित 987) के नियम 40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 
कार्यालय पोस्टमास्टर जनरल 
बरेली परिक्षेत्र, 
बरेली- 243004, 


[फा. सं. €-7077-/2026-27.97.] 
मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 859] 


New Delhi, the 22nd July, 2026 


S.O. 693.— In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official Purposes of the 
Union) Rules 976 (as amended in !987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub-ordinate office of the 
Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi: - 


Office of the Postmaster General, 
Bareilly Region, 
Bareilly - 24300] 
[F. No. E-07-/2026-OL] 
Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. (694.— केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 
संशोधित 987) के नियम 40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 


कार्यालय अधीक्षक डाकघर, 
शिवपुरी संभाग, 
शिवपुरी- 473 55 
[फा. सं. €-7077-/2026-27.47.] 


मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 
New Delhi, the 22nd August, 2026 


S.O. 694.— In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official Purposes of 
the Union) Rules 976 (as amended in 987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub-ordinate office of 
the Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi:- 


Office of the Superintendent of Post Offices 
Shivpuri division, 
Shivpuri - 473 55 
[F. No. E-07-/2026-OL] 
Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 25 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. (695.— केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 
संशोधित 987) के नियम 40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 


कार्यालय अधीक्षक डाकघर, 
मंडला संभाग, 
मंडला - 48/ 66 


[फा. सं. €-707-/2026-27.47.] 
मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 


8592 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 22nd July, 2026 


S.O. 695.— In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official Purposes of 
the Union) Rules 976 (as amended in !987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub-ordinate office 
of the Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi:- 


Office of the Superintendent of Post Offices 
Mandla division, 
Mandla — 48] 66l 
[F. No. E-07-/2026-OL] 
Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4696.— केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 
संशोधित 987) के नियम 40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 


कार्यालय अधीक्षक डाकघर, 
विदिशा संभाग, 
विदिशा- 464 004 
[फा. सं. €-707-/2026-27.47.] 
मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 


New Delhi, the 22nd August, 2026 


9.0. 696.— .............. In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official 
Purposes of the Union) Rules 976 (as amended in !987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub- 
ordinate office of the Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working 
knowledge of Hindi:- 


Office of the Superintendent of Post Offices 
Vidisha division, 
Vidisha - 464 00 
[F. No. E-07-/2026-OL] 
Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 22 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4697.-- केन्द्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम 976 (यथा 
संशोधित 987) के नियम 40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में, डाक विभाग के निम्नलिखित अधीनस्थ कार्यालय, जिसके 
80 प्रतिशत से अधिक अधिकारियों/कर्मचारियों ने हिन्दी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को एतदद्वारा अधिसूचित 
करती है:- 
कार्यालय अधीक्षक डाकघर, 
सतना संभाग, 
सतना - 485 004 

[फा. सं. S-407-/2026-27.47.] 


मनोज कुमार, उप महानिदेशक (प्रशिक्षण/राजभाषा) 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8593 


New Delhi, the 22nd July, 2026 


S.O. 697.— In Pursuance of sub rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Language (use for official Purposes of 
the Union) Rules 976 (as amended in |987), the Central Government hereby notifies following Sub-ordinate office 
of the Department of Posts, where more than 80% Officers/Officials have acquired the working knowledge of Hindi:- 


Office of the Superintendent of Post Offices 
Satna division, 
Satna - 485 00I 
[F. No. E-l07-/2026-OL] 
Manoj Kumar, Deputy Director General (Training/OL) 


श्रम एवं रोजगार मत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 4698.--- औघोगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 ;947 का ॥4द्ध की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और श्री गिरजा शंकर तिवारील के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय कानपूर के पंचाट (64/2043) 
प्रकाशित करती है| 


[सं0 Vel-72072/25/20 2-आई आर (4-ID] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT 
New Delhi, the 30th July, 2026 


S.O. 698.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 64/203) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Kanpur as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State Bank 
of India and Shri Girja Shanker Tiwaril. 


[No. L-202/25/202-IR(B-II)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT, KANPUR 
ID Case No. 64 of 203 
Present ShriRajendra Prasad Srivastava, H.J.S. (Retd.) 
Shri Girja Shanker Tiwaril, 
S/o Shri Chhote Lal Tiwari, 
C/o Shri O.P. Mathur, 
7/K-36, Sarvodaya Nagar, 
Kanpur (U.P.)- 208025. 
8020 2 2 snes Workman 

Vs. 
(i) The General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

MotiMahal, Hazratgaj, 


Lucknow. 


8594 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(ii) The Zonal Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Mall Road, 
Kanpur (U.P.) 
२३85४ शा नग नर बम Management 
(JUDGMENT) 
(Passed on this 24th day of April, 2026) 


As per letter dated 6/05/203 by the Government of India, Ministry of Labour, New Delhi, the reference has been 
made to this Tribunal under Section-l0 of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (in short the 'Act’) as per Notification No. L- 
202/25/202-IR(B-D) dt.6/05/203. The dispute under reference relates to: 


"Whether the action of the management of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Shri Girja 
Shanker Tiwari S/o Shri Chhote Lal Tiwari workman with effect from 07.05./96686 and not considering his 
name for reemployment while reemploying others including the recruitment of fresh hands is just fair & 
legal? If not, to what relief the workman concerned is entitled to?" 


Claimant/workman Girja Shanker Tiwari (hereinafter stated as the claimant) has filed the statement of claim with 
averments which may be concisely stated as hereunder: 


(I) Claimant/applicant was employed under the Zonal Office, State Bank Of India Kanpur in Gwaltoli 
Branch, Kanpur in subordinate cadre. The service of the applicant was terminated on 0.05.988 in violation 
of the provisions of Industrial disputes Act !947. (Central) After the termination of the service of the 
applicant new hands have been employed in place of the applicant in violation of Section 25 H of the 
Industrial Disputes Act 947,. 


(II) The action of the employer in terminating the services of the applicant is illegal and is unfair labour 
practice because the applicant was working on the permanent post, but after termination of the applicant new 
hands had been employed. This is also against the principles of natural justice. 


(III) The employer has done this type of unfair labour practice and illegal work and exploitation i.e. engaging 
one workman and terminating his service after few days and then again engaging another person and again 
terminating his services is being done with hundreds of persons. The applicant along with number of such 
other victimised persons started agitation by staging Dharna, demonstrations etc. against the illegal, unfair 
and unjust action of the State Bank of India. 


(IV) Thereafter, due to protest of the workmen, the State Bank of India decided to hold tests/interview so that 
regular and permanent appointment may be given to workmen who have already worked in the Bank. 


(V) The action of the Bank in holding test/interview was illegal because under the provisions of the 
Industrial Disputes Act |947 the applicant was a retrenched employee and he was to be given appointment in 
the Bank not on the basis of any test/interview. But directly by the Bank as provided under Section 25 H of 
the Industrial Disputes Act 947. 


(VI) The bank invited applications through advertisements in newspaper for giving permanent appointment 
in the Bank. The applicant also applied and he appeared in the interview held in August 99!. The applicant 
passed in the interview The Bank for illmotive and malafide reasons did not give permanent appointment to 
the applicant. It is submitted that the intention of the Bank was not fair through out and they wanted to get 
rid, by deceiving, the applicant and other workmen as such instead of giving appointment to the applicant. 
the Bank kept the name of the applicant in the waiting list. The Bank for malafide reason and unfair labour 
practice did not inform anything to the applicant nor published the waiting list in the news papers or 
otherwise. However from the enquiries it came to the knowledge of the applicant that I have passed in the 
interview and my name was in within 20 of the waiting list for giving permanent appointment in the Bank. It 
is requested that the Hon'ble Tribunal be pleased to summon the waiting of 99 from the Bank so that 
justices may be done. 


(VII) Out of aforesaid waiting list of 99! all most all the candidates have been appointed by the Bank but 
the Bank has not given appointment to the applicant. This is clearly unfair labour practice and illegal action 
of the Bank and it is also against the principles of natural justices. 


(VHD) The Bank has hided all the information regarding result of interview, serial number in the waiting list, 
how many persons have been appointed etc. from the workmen so that the workmen may not get 
employment in the Bank. But it has come to the knowledge that the applicant's name was within 20 in the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8595 


said waiting list. The Bank has appointed more than 200 persons who are junior in the list and new hands 
than applicant. The action of the Bank is illegal and unjust by all means. 


(IX) The termination of the applicant is retrenchment as defined in the Industrial Disputes Act 947. The 
employer has not paid notice pay and retrenchment compensation. As such the termination of the applicant is 
illegal and unjust and the applicant is entitled to the reinstatement with continuity of service and full back 
wages. 


(X) After the termination of the applicant so many new hand have been appointed by the Bank. As such the 
action of the Bank is illegal and unjust and the applicant is entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service 
and full back wages. 


(XI) The name of the applicant was within 20 of the waiting list of !99l. The applicant has not been given 
appointment but all most all the persons from the said waiting list have been appointed. As such the action of 
the Bank is illegal and unjust and the applicant is entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service and full 
back wages. 


Respondent side has submitted the written statement with averments which may be summarized as stated below: 


(i) It is essential to mention that to abuse/misuse of the provisions of the I. D. Act 947[4 of 947] 
instant industrial dispute has been raised by the applicant regarding his alleged termination from 
0.05.998, which is not tenable in the eyes of law. On this alone ground case is liable to be 
dismissed at the very outset by the Hon'ble Tribunal. 


(ii) The alleged disengagement being of 988&23 years have passed since then the industrial dispute 
cannot be said to have survived & a stale alleged dispute can not be allowed be raised now. 


(iii) It is specific to state that to create illegal pressure upon the bank's management, General Manager, 
Lucknow as well as Zonal Manager, Kanpur have knowingly been made parties by the claimant in 
the present dispute whereas claimant never worked for a day in both offices. It is made clear that 
relationship of employer & employee does not exist between the rival parties. In the light of above 
given facts claim is legally not maintainable & is deserved to be rejected forthwith by the Hon'ble 
court. 


(iv) It is clearly submitted that present case is out of ambit of continuous service as defined in section 25 
B of the act because applicant never pleaded before the A.L.C. [C] that he had worked for 240 days 
at Gwaltoli Branch, Kanpur therefore provisions of section 25 F do not attract in the instant matter. 


(५) It is necessary to add that claimant was not engaged in the bank against any post. To enrich our 
contention it is narrated here that there is a prescribed procedure for appointment in the respondent 
bank, which is evident from fact that appointment letter was not filed by the applicant along with 
his claim statement before the Hon'ble Court. 


(vi) It is mentioned here that panels of suitable persons were prepared by the selection committee after 
conducting interviews of eligible persons & list of successful persons was published at notice board 
of the bank at relevant point of time. It has to be informed that thereafter a settlement on 09.06.95 
was entered into between above referred parties before Shri A. Prabhakar Regional Labour 
Commissioner [Central], Hyderabad that panels of temporary employees & daily wagers will be 
kept alive upto March 997 & after lapse of said date claim of persons empanelled is not tenable in 
the eyes of law as settled by Apex Court as well as various High Court. 


(vii) In reply to assertions of paras 2 & 3 of the claim it is submitted here that claimant was never 
appointed in bank hence question of his alleged retrenchment does not arise. It is submitted that 
even if the self serving allegation of the claimant is accepted that he has worked and _ that 
subsequently during the process of giving chance of absorption, he was invited for interview, the 
said process of holding interview conducted in terms of settlements constitutes compliance of 
section 25 H of the I.D. Act as has been held by the Hon'ble Supteme Court in Regional Manager 
S.B.I V. Rakesh Kumar Tiwari AIR 2006 S.C. 839. Also even if the self serving statement of the 
claimant is further accepted that his name was included in the panel of candidates wait listed for 
appointment against future vacancies but he is not found entitled to get claimed relief in the light of 
view taken by Hon'ble Apex Court that wait listed candidates can not have a valid claim to any post 
upon the lapse of the wait list panel. 


(viii) In claim statement is mere reiterations. It is clearly submitted that applicant is not entitled to get 
relief claimed from the hon’ble court. In the light of afore-mentioned true facts claim has no force of 
law & on the face of given reply case may be turned down by the Hon'ble Tribunal. 


After that applicant filed rejoinder against written statement filed by opposite party is read as under: 


8596 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


l. The contents of Para No. | of the written statement of the employer is wrong, baseless and 
against the provision of Law hence are not admitted. In reply it is submitted that the services of the 
applicant has been illegally and unjustly terminated by the employer. The termination of the 
applicant is retrenchment. The employer has appointed new hands but has not given chance to the 
applicant as required under section 25 H of the Industrial Dispute Act 947. The Labour Law is for 
the welfare and protection from the exploitation of workmen i.e. weaker section of the society. 
Therefore the law makers, i.e the Parliament of the country, keeping all these facts and 
circumstances in mind and past experienced did not mention any time limit for reemployment of 
retrenched workers in section 25 H of the Industrial Dispute Act 947. In view of these submissions 
no one including all courts of the country can and should not impose any time limit for raising such 
dispute in the name of old cases or belated case. As Such the objection is baseless and misconceived 
and is liable to be rejected. 


2. The contents of Para No. 6 of the written statement of the employer are wrong, baseless and 
misconceived hence are not admitted. In reply it is submitted that the applicant was engaged against 
a clear post. The Opposite Party Bank is a very big exploiter, The Opposite party engaged the 
applicant and after termination engaged another person. Thus the Bank has engaged number of 
persons. The action of the employer is unfair labour practices, malafide and exploitation of poor 
workers and action of the employer is to be condemned. 


3. The contents of Para No. [2 of the written statement as are stated are not correct hence are not 
admitted. In reply it is submitted that the settlement at Hyderabad has no concerned or meaning 
with Kanpur employees. It is also submitted that the applicant was never member of any union or 
federation as such the agreement signed by the so called union or federation is not binding upon the 
applicant. This is a fraud done by the Bank to befool the employees who were demanding 
reinstatement as per law. The citations of the rulings are not mentioned in the para under reply as 
such no proper comments can be offered on it. However it is submitted that if full facts of the case 
before the Hon'ble court were submitted the decision must have been in favour of the employees. 


Applicant filed some documents which are read as under: 
l. Certificate issued by the Employer. 
2. Certificate issued by the employer. 
3. List of employees employed after my termination. 
4. Employer application dated 8.5.996 
5. Proof of agitation, paper cuttings 2. 
In rebuttal opposite party some documents which are read as under: 
l. Copy of settlement dated 7..987. 
2. Copy of settlement dated 27.0.988. 
3. Copy of settlement dated 09.0.99]. 
4. Copy of settlement dated 09.06.995. 


Main question in this reference is that Whether the action of the management of State Bank of India terminating the 
services of Shri Girja Shanker Tiwari S/o Shri Chhote Lal Tiwari workman with effect from 0.05.]988 and not 
considering his name for reemployment while reemploying others including the recruitment of fresh hands is just fair 
& legal? If not, to what relief the workman concerned is entitled to? 


Applicant said that he was employed in opposite party bank. His service was terminated on 0.05.988 against the 
provision of Industrial Dispute Act and against the termination of the service of the applicant new hands have been 
employed in place of applicant. This is unfair labour practice because applicant was working on the permanent post. 
Due to protest of workmen, opposite party decided to hold test/interview so that regular and permanent appointment 
may be given to workmen who have already worked in the Bank. The applicant was a retrenched employee and he 
was to be given appointment in the Bank not on the basis of any test/interview as provided ID Act. The applicant 
applied and he appeared in the interview held in August 99l. The applicant passed in the interview but due to 
illmotive and malafide reasons bank did not give permanent appointment to the applicant. The bank kept the name of 
the applicant in the waiting list. The bank for malafide reason and unfair labour practice did not inform anything to 
the applicant nor published the waiting list in the news papers or otherwise. 


Against that opposite party said in our written statement that the alleged disengagement being of !988 and after 23 
years the industrial dispute cannot be raised. It is also made clear that relationship of employer and employee does not 
exist between the rival parties and this case is out of ambit of continuous service as defined in section 25 B of the Act. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8597 


The applicant was not engaged in the bank against any post and never appointed in the bank hence the question of his 
alleged retrenchment does not arise. It is also mentioned here that panels of suitable persons were prepared by the 
selection committee after conducting interviews of eligible persons and list of successful persons was published at 
notice board of the bank. 


Now the main question is applicant is working on permanent post as stated in para 2 of the our claim statement. 


Applicant filed by paper number 0/2 certificate issued by the employer in this certificate the applicant worked in the 
bank as Temporary Messenger on daily wages from 03.02.987 to 22.05.987 for 89 days only. In paper number |0/3 
certificate issued by the employer in this certificate the applicant worked in the bank as a casual labour for 89 days 
from 02.02.988 to 30.04.988 and in paper number |0/4 list of employees employed after my termination i.e. Ram 
Chandra, Ajay Kumar, Rakesh Kumar and Satish Chandra. 


To decide above question the documentary/oral evidence of the parties are important. 


On perusal of the record it emerged out that the applicant filed an applicant for summoning of documents which are as 
under: 


l. Vouchers of three years relating to newly appointed employees after terminating the service of worker. 
2. The result of interview held in [99] in which applicant had appeared along with its waiting list. 
3. Seniority list of sub staff with the date of appointment under SBI Zone Office, Kanpur. 
4. Copy of application dated 8.05.996 filed by employer in ID case no. 03 of 987. 
In rebuttal written objection has been filed by opposite party bank. 
On 24.04.208 this Tribunal has passed an order which is read as under: 


I have heard parties auth. Representatives on the application of the worker for summoning documents from 
the management and its objection filed by the management. 


The reference in the Industrial Dispute is with regard to the termination of the worker and for not 
considering his name for re-employment while employing others. 


Worker has requested to summon vouchers of three years relating to newly appointed employees after 
terminating the service of worker. The prayer cannot be allowed as worker has not named any newly 
appointed person whose voucher is requested. 


Worker has also requested to summon the result of the interview held in 4997 in which worker had appeared 
along with its waiting list. A.R. for the management admitted that the list is available with them. 


Likewise prayer for summoning seniority list of sub staff with the date of appointment under SBI Zone Office 
Kanpur cannot be allowed as it is not relevant for the disposal of the case. 


Worker has also requested to summon copy of application dated 4/6,.05.96 filed by employer in ID case no. 
3/87. This prayer of worker cannot be allowed as worker may obtain certificate copy of it and can file in this 
case. 


For the reasons given above the application of the worker is partly allowed and the management is directed 
to file the result of interview held in /997 along with waiting list as prayed in Para 4 of the application. 


In compliance of the order dated 24.04.20I8 passed by this Tribunal, opposite party filed an affidavit along with 
office order/messenger report with specific contention that result of interview as well as wait list prepared in year 
99] could not be located or traced even after best efforts of concerned staff, as more than 27 years have been lapsed 
and H.R. section premises, where interviews were conducted, had been transferred on different places in different 
point of time during the intervening period. 


The applicant examined himself as W.W.] in our chief examination he supported our claim statement, and in para 2 
said that after the completion of the all formalities he appointed in sub ordinate cadre for permanent post. Further he 
said as stated in our claim statement. In our cross-examination he said that I did not issue any letter of protest to SBI 
Gwaltoli Branch after my termination on 0.05.988. I was born 0!.0!.969, the witness shows his Adhar card, Pan 
card and Driving License showing his date of birth as 0i.0!.969. I was engaged as a casual labour. I can produce 
original of the said certificate issued by Branch Manager on 3].05.[988. I have not mentioned that I worked for 240 
days in preceding Twelve months prior to termination on 0I.05.988. My attendance was not recorded in the 
attendance register of other SBI staff. My wages were paid through Bankers Cheque. I was not given wages for 
Sunday and other holidays except for 5" August and 26" January. I have not mentioned that after my termination on 
0.05.988 Ram Chandra, Ajay Kumar and Satish Chandra were engaged. I have not filed any document regarding 
engagement of those persons by O.P. I did not come across any notification issued for reengagement of terminated 
workmen by the Bank. No appointment letter was issued to me before my engagement. I did not come across any 


8598 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


news item that post of Messenger in SBI Gwaltoli Branch was lying vacant before my engagement. No call letter for 
interview was received by me. I did not see the list of successful candidates. I did not file any application form prior 
to appearing in the interview. 


Applicant said in our claim statement in para 2 and in our chief examination of para 2 that applicant was working on 
permanent post and in our chief examination of para 2 again repeated above. He also said that after complying of all 
formalities he was appointed but as per his documentary evidence which is filed by applicant as mentioned above ‘the 
applicant was appointed as temporary messenger for daily wages from 03.02.7967 to 22.05.7987 for 89 days. 
Further as his documentary evidence ‘he worked as a casual labour for 89 days from 02.02. 7/986 to 30.04. /9686 * 


In our cross-examination as mentioned above he said that I do agree in the certificate dated 3.05.988 it is stated I 
was engaged as a casual labour hence applicant admitted that he was engaged as casual labour as shown in his above 
certificates. 


Now as the question of work 240 days applicant, applicant said in our cross-examination of page 2, I have not 
mentioned that I worked for 240 days in previous twelve months prior to his termination on 0.05.988. The applicant 
is not mentioned in his claim statement that he worked for 240 days as he said in our cross-examination above. And 
other worked concerned the applicant said my attendance was not recorded the attendance register of other SBI staff. 
My wages were paid through Bankers Cheque. I was not given wages for Sunday and other holidays except for 5" 
August and 26" January. I have not mentioned that after my termination on 0.05.988 Ram Chandra, Ajay Kumar, 
Rakesh Kumar and Satish Chandra were engaged. I have not filed any documents regarding engagement of those 
persons. Hence applicant is admitted that reengagement of above persons not mentioned in his claim statement. No 
appointment letter was issued to me before my engagement. No call letter interview was received by me. I did not see 
the list of successful candidates. I did not file any application form prior to appearing in the interview. 


Applicant said in our claim statement as mentioned above that he is working on a permanent post and further he said 
he was retrenched employee and he also applied and appeared in the interview held in August, !99 but he have not 
filed any documents as interview letter. He said he was working on the permanent post but he have no any 
appointment letter, pay slip etc. which shows that he was permanent employee as stated in his claim statement. He 
never seen the list of successful candidates. 


Opposite party is a nationalised bank there is procedure of appointment in all cadre. After adopting above procedure 
opposite party bank appoint any person as per criteria. 


The applicant said that there is violation of section 25-H of the Act. Section 25-H is said that: 


25-H. Re-employment of retrenched workmen- Where any workmen are retrenched and the employer 
proposes to take into his employ any persons, he shall, in such manner as may be prescribed, give an 
opportunity to the retrenched workmen who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re-employment, and 
such retrenched workmen] who offer themselves for re-employment shall have preference over other 
persons. 


But there is no any evidence that opposite party doing violation of section 25-H of the Act. One side applicant said 
that he was working on permanent post and he further said he was retrenched employee. He never worked in any 
calendar year for 240 day as he admitted. 


As per the question of benefits of Section 25-B of the Act which is as read as under: 
[25-B. Definition of continuous service- For the purpose of this Chapter- 


(4) a workmen shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted 
service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorised leave or an 
accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock-out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on 
the part of the workman; [25-B. Definition of continuous service 


(2) where a workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (7) for a period of one year 
or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than- 


(i) ninety-five days, in the case of a workman employed below ground in a mine; and 


(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8599 


Now the question whether the applicant is employee of opposite party Bank. As per the question of the employer and 
workman in the ID Act, there is a workman definition in section 2 (s) is read as under: 


"workman" means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any manual, 
unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward, whether the terms 
of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any proceeding under this Act in relation to an 
industrial dispute, includes any such person who has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection 
with, or as a consequence of, that dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that 
dispute, but does not include any such person- 


(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, 7950 (45 of /959), or the Army Act, 7950 (46 of 7950), or the Navy 
Act, /957 (62 ०47957), or 


(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prison, or 
(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity, or 


(iv) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding [one thousand rupees] per 
menses or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers vested 
in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature. 


And employer definition is given in section 2 (g) is read as under: 
“employer” means- 


(i) in relation to an industry carried on by or under the authority of any department of '[the Central 
Government or a State Government] the authority prescribed in this behalf, or where no authority is 
prescribed, the head of the department; 


(ii) in relation to an industry carried on by or on behalf of a local authority, the chief executive officer of that 
authority; 


In view of the above, the applicant has failed to prove the existence of a valid employer-employee relationship or the 
completion of 240 days of service. Therefore, the action of the Management in ceasing the engagement of the 
applicant is held to be just, proper, and legal. 


The claim of the applicant is hereby dismissed. The applicant is not entitled to any relief of reinstatement, back 
wages, or compensation. 


Accordingly, the reference is answered in the negative. The claimant is not entitled to any relief. A 'Nil' Award is 
hereby passed. 


Parties are left to bear their respective costs. 
Date: 24.04.2026 
RAJENDRA PRASAD SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 2 जून, 2026 


का.आ. 7699.— 9 औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम t947 (4947 का 44 ) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय हैदराबाद के पंचाट (48/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं., एल - 2025/0 / 2026- आई आर (aI-T)-46] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 2nd June, 2026 


S.O. 699.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.48/2003) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State Bank of 
India and their workmen. 


[No. L-!2025/0/2026- IR(B-I)-46] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


8600 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 
Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6™ day of April, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 48/2003 
[Old ID No. 4/999 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri Gollamudi Adam, 
S/o Subba Rao, 
Old Ponur, 
Ward No.25, 
Murthy Mahal, 
Ponnur. Guntur District. ... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Ponnur Village & Mandalam, 
Guntur District. 
2, The Chief General Manager, 
Local Head Office, 
State Bank of India, Koti, 


Bank Street, 

Hyderabad. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner: Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


Sri Gollamudi Adam, who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner 
has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this 
Tribunal bearing ID No. 4/999, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-026/i/200l-IR(C.ID dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 48/2003. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200I and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 860] 


Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in W.A.No.|268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.209. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement is that the 
Petitioner herein was engaged by the Respondent Bank—State Bank of India—as a Messenger (temporary employee). 
The Petitioner have joined the service of the Respondent Bank and worked from 987 to 997 and rendered 
unblemished service spreading over a period of about 0 years. It is submitted that the services of the Petitioner were 
terminated with verbal orders dt. 3.03.997 without assigning any valid reasons. But the Respondent has retained 
Petitioner’s juniors in service. The Respondent has failed to take the prior permission from the government for his 
retrenchment. It is submitted that he could not secure any alternative employment till date inspite of his best efforts. 
It is submitted that there is sufficient work with the Respondent and extending the opportunities to others denying the 
Petitioner is unjust and contrary to law. Hence, the action of the Respondent is not justified. Therefore, it is prayed 
to grant the relief of reinstatement with full back wages and all attendant benefits. 


4. The Respondent Bank contends that the reference made is untenable under the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 
as the Bank temporarily engaged subordinate staff—messengers, sweepers, etc.—strictly on a need-based, ad hoc 
basis to ensure uninterrupted operations to address staff shortages due to leave vacancies and constraints imposed by 
the Government of India and RBI on hiring. 


5. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which represents majority of the 
employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as its’ members espoused the cause of 
temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary service in 2 calendar months in the bank and 
who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for 
absorption and permanent appointments. Various discussions were held to resolve the said issue, resulting in five 
settlement agreements between the Bank and the Workmen. 


6. The first setthement dated 7.!.987 (under Sec. 2(p) r/w Sec. 8(.) of the ID Act) categorized temporary 
employees and provided for consideration of permanent absorption against vacancies between 987—99!. The 
second settlement dated 6.07.988 extended this period to 987—992. The third settlement dated 27.0.988 
reaffirmed consideration of vacancies arising from !988—992. Following these, the Government of India issued 


8602 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


recruitment guidelines on 6.08.990, recommending settlement-based absorption for temporary employees with 
more than 240 days of service in a |2-month block. For those with fewer days, the guidelines allowed for discretion- 
based conciliation. 


7. Despite this, the Bank, in a liberal approach, considered even those with less than 90 days' service and those 
employed since 975. However, para 6(k) of the approach paper clarified that this would be a one-time exercise 
resolving all past claims. Subsequently, the fourth settlement dated 09.0!.99] extended panel validity to 994, with 
daily wagers considered for 995—l996 vacancies. It is submitted that Zone-wise panels (989 for temporary 
employees and 992 for daily wagers) were also created, listing candidates in descending order of service from 
0.07.975 to 3.07.988. 


8. The Federation also sought implementation through the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), resulting 
in a conciliation agreement on 09.02.995. This led to the fifth settlement dated 30.07.996. Finally, on 27.02.997, a 
Memorandum of Understanding recorded that 403 messengerial vacancies were identified and would be filled from 
the 989 panel. Both panels were agreed to lapse on 3.03.997, Thus, the Workman, who served less than 240 days 
in any !2-month block during the reference period, has no legal claim outside these settlements. 


9. It is further argued that the Workman’s case has already been considered under the five settlements. The 
settlements were time-bound and binding on both parties, hence, the Bank was not obligated to absorb all empanelled 
candidates. Sustaining panels beyond 3.03.997 would contradict the settlements and constitutional principles 
(Articles 4 & 6), amounting to backdoor regularization. 


0. The Hon’ble High Court in WP No.2964/94 has affirmed that such settlements are binding and temporary 
service does not create a right to regularization unless the Workman can show violation of a specific settlement term, 
which is not the case here. The Hon'ble High Court in WP १२०.। 2964/94, held as follows, 


"Tt is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case 
of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the 
Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 37.3.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to 
claim that his services should be regularized on permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put 
forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to 
the Workman to claim any right which flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. 
As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the 
settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any 
ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails 
and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


l]. Hence, the Workman’s claim was held misconceived. Furthermore, if the panels were not allowed to lapse, it 
would undermine open recruitment processes, violating constitutional rights of other eligible candidates under 
Articles 4 and 6 of the Constitution as well as contrary to the settlements. 


2. Similarly placed ex-temporary employees approached the High Court via WP No. 9206/995. Though 
allowed by the Single Judge, the Division Bench reversed the decision in WA No. 86/998., The Supreme Court 
subsequently dismissed SLP Nos. !886-!888/998, making the original judgment irrelevant. 


3. The Workman (१४५७।) filed and relied on documents Ex.W to W3, including appointment letters, interview 
letters, and service certificates showing employment across various periods. The Respondent examined MWI, Sri 
K. Chandra Sekhar Goud, and produced !2 documents (Ex.Ml—M]2), including all five settlements, panel details, 
and judgments of the Hon’ble High Court and Supreme Court, conclusively supporting the Bank’s position. 


4. The Workman also cited various judicial precedents which shall be addressed in the relevant portion of 
this Award. 
5. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
6. On the basis of pleadings and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both the parties, following 
points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 
I. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Local Head Office, Hyderabad in terminating the 
services of Workman Sri Gollamudi Adam, a Temporary/Messenger with effect from 3].3.[997 is 
justified? 


Il. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8603 


Findings:- 


7. Issue No.I:- The Workman alleged that Respondent has terminated his services by oral order on 3.3.997 
without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof illegally. Further, he alleges that he 
has been terminated from service in violation of provision contained under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, !947 and same 
is liable to be set aside. 


8. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked continuously for 240 days 
in any preceding calendar year and reference of the industrial dispute is not maintainable. Before examining the 
claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to have a glance on the relevant provision pertaining to 
retrenchment of workman under I.D. Act, 947. 


2(00) “retrenchment” means the termination by the employer of the service of a workman for any reason whatsoever, 
otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by way of disciplinary action, but does not include— 


(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or 


(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the contract of employment between the 
employer and the workman concerned contains a stipulation in that behalf; or 


(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the contract of employment between 
the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in 
that behalf contained therein; or 


(c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health; ” 


In view of the definition of retrenchment, perused the record. The Workman claims that he had been terminated from 
the service of the Respondent in contravention of the provision of ID Act. The case of the Workman does not fall in 
any exclusive clause of section 2(00). Therefore, he is included in the category of retrenchment as defined under 
section 2(00) of the I.D.Act, 947. 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


Thus, in view of the above provision, Workman has to prove that he had worked with Respondent continuously for 
240 days uninterruptedly in !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from data of his termination ie., 3!.3.997. 
It is settled law that the initial burden of proof to prove the fact of 240 days of service in the !2 months of a calendar 
year just preceding from the date of termination, lies upon the Workman and _ he is duty bound to prove this factum 
by adducing oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


As regard burden of proof and calculation of 240 continuous working days, following decisions of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court are relevant as discussed here under:- 


8604 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of 2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of I2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


9. Thus, in view of the law laid down by Hon'ble Apex Court as discussed above in respect of calculating the 
240 days continuous service by workman as per provision under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 
947, we have to examine whether Workman herein has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his 
claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination Le., 
3.3.997 by his evidence. 


20. In order to corroborate the averments made in claim statement, Petitioner has examined himself as ४४४] 
and in his oral testimony WWI has stated that he joined the service of Respondent at Ponnur Branch, on 28.7.87 as a 
Messenger and worked continuously in various branches depending upon the availability of work and also as per the 
orders of bank officers till 3.3.!997. | ४४७७] states that the Respondent has not given any advance notice to him 
before his termination and has not obtained prior permission from central government for his retrenchment and 
Respondent has not given him any order of termination. Further, ७] states that he had worked Ponnur branch of 
the Respondent and 75.9४] is the Service certificate for [296 days for the period of July 987 to March, 997. Ex. 
W2 is the Copy of representation. Ex. W3 is the acknowledgement of Ex.W2 representation. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8605 


2I. Further WWI states that he worked for more than 240 days continuously in different spells in one year 
period of time and he worked for 260 days continuously during the period from April, 996 to March, 997, Ex.W | is 
the certificate in this regard. Further, ४७] 5065 that there were no complaints against him from any customers or 
officers of the Respondent throughout the period of his service. This Witness was cross examined by the Respondent 
counsel and in his cross examination the ४४५७४] states that he was given appointment as a messenger on temporary 
basis in the year !987. Further, witness states that he was not sponsored by any employment exchange. Further, 
witness states that he did not work continuously and he used to work depending upon availability of work in the bank. 
Further, in reply to the question put by the Respondent counsel in cross examination, WW/ states that it is true that 
he did not work for 240 days in any year in his service. 


Month Working days 
April, l996 30 
May, 996 3] 
June, 996 Cae 
July, 996 29 
August, 996 23 
September, 996 30 
October, 996 29 
November, 996 pO 
December, 996 0 नि 
January, [997 29 
February, |997 3 
March, 997 3] 
Total 260 


Thus, sum of working days as shown in the above table is 260 days which is more than 240 working days as required 
under the provision of section 25F of the ID Act for continuous service. 


22: However, Learned Counsel for Respondent bank has contended that the Petitioner has not worked 
continuously for 240 days in a calendar year with the Respondent and protection from termination is not available to 
Petitioner as per provision under section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. On going oral and documentary evidence available 
on record it manifest that Respondent had engaged the Petitioner as a temporary messenger in different spells as 
mentioned in his appointment letter during the total period of about l0 years. We may conclude from the documents 
filed in evidence on record, that the Respondent has created artificial breaks in the working days of the Petitioner in 
order to deprive him from completing 240 days of continuous service and in order to defeat social security provision 
under the I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, Petitioner has been regularly engaged during the long period of 0 years by the 
Respondent as a temporary messenger and has created artificial breaks of few days or more in his engagement as 
employee. The conduct of Respondent in creating artificial breaks in engagement of workers is nothing but unfair 
labour practice adopted by Respondent in order to deprive the Petitioner from entitlement of any benefits of social 
security under the provision of I.D. Act, !947. Thus, it can safely be concluded that Respondent with malafide 
intention has deliberately created artificial break in the employment of the Petitioner as a temporary messenger. 


23. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and on going documentary and oral evidence on record I am of the 
view that the Workman had worked for 240 days continuously in !2 months of calendar year just preceding from the 
date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.997. Undisputedly, Respondent has not filed any document pertaining to the fact 
that 3 months notice was issued to the Petitioner as per provision contained under section 25N of the ID Act before 
termination of Petitioner for service by oral order w.e.f.l.4.!997. Further, there is no evidence on record to the fact 
that Respondent has paid any amount toward compensation. Therefore, oral termination order of the Petitioner from 
employment issued by Respondent with effect from |.4.997 is in contravention of provision contained under section 
25N of the ID. Act, 947 and hence not sustainable in the eye of law. 


8606 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Shankar Bhimrao Kadam and others Vs. Tata Mototrs Limited, Bombay High Court in its 
decision dated 28.2.2022 in Writ Petition No.5588 of 20!7 have held: - 


"52. I have independently assessed the entire oral and documentary evidence adduced before the Labour Court in 
these cases and upon analysis of the same, I have come to a firm conclusion that in hundreds of cases, the present 
Respondent has created a farcical picture by posing that the work allotted to the temporaries was limited only to the 
maximum extent of 7 months. As discussed above, the dedicated department for engagement of temporary workers, 
apparently kept a close watch on the duration of employment of these Petitioners and in a case like Balu Bapuji 
Shelke, who had put in 232 days in his first round and 238 days in his third round, his service was abruptly 
intercepted and he was disengaged. He had almost reached the figure of 240 days and was thrown out, after 
completing 238 days. This indicates that the Respondent-management has created an eye-wash and paper-work with 
the intention of creating evidence that no worker had completed 240 days. Even in Sunil Pralhad Khomane (supra), 
the learned judge of this court, after analyzing the entire evidence before him, concluded that the company has 
apparently misused Section 2(00)(bb). For the reasons assigned by me and my esteemed brother in Sunil (supra), I 
find that the said conclusion was justified and in all these cases in hands, Section 2(00)(bb) will not be applicable. To 
hold otherwise, would create a mockery of Section 2(00)(bb). 


58. It cannot be ignored from the various rounds of temporary employments of these temporaries that after one 
disengagement, they used to look forward for the next appointment order. As expected, they used to receive such 
appointment orders. They used to perform their duties not only till the tenure mentioned in the appointment order was 
completed, but even upto reaching any duration between 225 days to 238 days in one single stint of temporary 
employment. None of the temporaries in such cases, ever received an appointment order that a particular temporary 
would work for 238 days or 236 days, etc. The maximum tenure was an appointment for 7 months. This was not the 
pattern followed in Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd., Nagpur (supra), inasmuch, as it was noticed by this court in the said 
case that the workers used to work in other factories during their disengagement and had actually approached the 
Industrial Court after about 9 to 23 years." 


Similarly, in the present case Respondent has issued number of appointment letters to engage the Workman for the 
work in different spells for his employment in its branches. The practice of Respondent management of issuance of 
the appointment letters in different spells for this engagement of the Petitioner Workman during the whole period for 
more than ten years clearly manifest that Respondent management has adopted unfair labour practice in order to 
deprive the Workman from availing social security benefits accruing to him under the provision of Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947. 


24. Perused the record. Petitioner witness ४४५७४] in his statement in chief has categorically stated that he had 
worked for more than 240 days continuously in different spells in a period of one year. He worked for 296 days 
continuously during the period from July, !987 to March, 4997 at Ponnur branch. >ि. ४] is the certificate in this 
regard. Whereas in the cross examination witness WWI stood firm in respect of his statement given in chief 
examination. However, at one place in cross examination in reply to the question he had given the statement that it is 
true that he did not work for 240 days in any year. But in the suggestions given by Respondent counsel witness has 
stated that it is not true to say that he had never worked for 240 days in any year as stated by him. It is settled law 
that the statement of any witness cannot be read in isolation and the whole statement has to be taken into 
consideration while appreciating the evidence in the case. Whereas the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked 
for more than 240 days in a calendar year with the Respondent is fully corroborated by oral and documentary 
evidence produced by the Petitioner. Therefore, the contention of the Respondent in view of the above is not 
tenable. Further, documents filed by the Petitioner in evidence goes to reveal that during the period from 987 upto 
the date of his termination i.e., 3l.3.!997 workman had been engaged by Respondent for the work on number of 
times with the breaks, that goes to manifest that there was the work available in the Respondent bank and also need 
of engagement of the Workman. Therefore, the Workman was engaged by Respondent management on number of 
times during the long period of more than 0 years and artificial breaks in the employment of Petitioner has been 
created by the Respondent intentionally and deliberately in order to deprive the workman from the social security 
benefit provided under the ID Act. Therefore, in view of the above, the contention of the Respondent is not tenable. 


Respondent has cited number of decisions of Hon’ble Apex Court and Hon'ble High Courts which are being 
discussed as hereunder:- 


In the case of Bholaram vs. PO, Labour Court Ambala & ors CWP No.4784/200 dated 2.6.20ll, of Hon'ble 
High Court of Punjab & Haryana, wherein Hon'ble High Court have held that Petitioner is directed to be reinstated in 
the service with 50% of back wages. 


Further, in the case of Kuldeep Singh vs. G.M., Instrument Design 0 & F., DOD, dated 3.2.200, the facts of the 
case are that the Petitioner Kuldeep, the workman was appointed as a Data Entry Operator on daily wages on 
8.0.I990 and he worked as such till 28.!.99! and thereafter on adhoc basis and worked upto 26.5.992 without 
any break when his services were terminated by the employer. The Respondent management, according to Petitioner, 
no notice or compensation in lieu thereof, was given for terminating his services though he had worked for 240 days 
in the preceding !2 months. In that case Hon'ble Supreme Court have held that the management has terminated the 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8607 


services of the Petitioner workman without complying the provision of Sec.25F of the I.D.Act, 947 and the said 
order is illegal, null and void deserves to be set aside, and ordered reinstatement of the Appellant workman with 
consequential service benefits without back wages within a period of eight weeks. 


Further, in the case of State of Karnataka vs. Uma Devi Civil Appeal No.3595-362 of 990 dated 0.4.2006, 
therein Constitutional Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court have held, 


“5. We have already indicated the constitutional scheme of public employment in this country, and the executive, or 

for that matter the Court, in appropriate cases, would have only the right to regularize an appointment made after 
following the due procedure, even though a non-fundamental element of that process or procedure has not been 
followed. This right of the executive and that of the court, would not extend to the executive or the court being in a 
position to direct that an appointment made in clear violation of the constitutional scheme, and the statutory rules 
made in that behalf, can be treated as permanent or can be directed to be treated as permanent. 


44. One aspect needs to be clarified. There may be cases where irregular appointments (not illegal appointments) as 
explained in §S.VINARAYANAPPA (supra), R.N..NANJUNDAPPA (supra), and B.N. NAGARAJAN (supra), and 
referred to in paragraph 3 above, of duly qualified persons in duly sanctioned vacant posts might have been made 
and the employees have continued to work for ten years or more but without the intervention of orders of courts or of 
tribunals. The question of regularization of the services of such employees may have to be considered on merits in the 
light of the principles settled by this Court in the cases above referred to and in the light of this judgment. In that 
context, the Union of India, the State Governments and their instrumentalities should take steps to regularize as a one 
time measure, the services of such irregularly appointed, who have worked for ten years or more in duly sanctioned 
posts but not under cover of orders of courts or of tribunals and should further ensure that regular recruitments are 
undertaken to fill those vacant sanctioned posts that require to be filled up, in cases where temporary employees or 
daily wagers are being now employed. The process must be set in motion within six months from this date. We also 
clarify that regularization, if any already made, but not subjudice, need not be reopened based on this judgment, but 
there should be no further by-passing of the constitutional requirement and regularizing or making permanent, those 
not duly appointed as per the constitutional scheme.”’ 


Thus, in the above cited decision Hon'ble Apex Court has laid down guidelines for deciding the question of 
regularization of the services of the employees. Further, as regard other decisions of Hon’ble Court filed by the 
Petitioner in support of his argument, therein, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid down the principle that the 
termination of the employee in contravention of the provision of Sec.25F of I.D. Act, !947 is illegal and null and 
void and liable to be set aside. 


Moreover, Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Anoop Sharma vs. Exec. Engineer Public Health Division dated 
9.4.200, Civil Appeal No.3478 of 200 have held:- 


“75. In State Bank of India ५. N. Sundara Money (supra), the Court emphasised that the workman cannot be 
retrenched without payment, at the time of retrenchment, compensation computed in terms of Section 25-F(b). 


46, The legal position has been beautifully summed up in Pramod Jha v. State of Bihar (supra) in the following words: 


"The underlying object of Section _25-F is twofold. Firstly, a retrenched employee must have one month's time 
available at his disposal to search for alternate employment, and so, either he should be given one month's notice of 
the proposed termination or he should be paid wages for the notice period. Secondly, the workman must be paid 
retrenchment compensation at the time of retrenchment, or before, so that once having been retrenched there should 
be no need for him to go to his employer demanding retrenchment compensation and the compensation so paid is not 
only a reward earned for his previous services rendered to the employer but is also a sustenance to the worker for the 
period which may be spent in searching for another employment. Section 25-F nowhere speaks of the retrenchment 
compensation being paid or tendered to the worker along with one month's notice; on the contrary, clause (b) 
expressly provides for the payment of compensation being made at the time of retrenchment and by implication it 
would be permissible to pay the same before retrenchment. Payment or tender of compensation after the time when 
the retrenchment has taken effect would vitiate the retrenchment and non-compliance with the mandatory provision 
which has a beneficial purpose and a public policy behind it would result in nullifying the retrenchment. 


47. If the workman is retrenched by an oral order or communication or he is simply asked not to come for duty, the 
employer will be required to lead tangible and substantive evidence to prove compliance of Clauses (a) and (b) 
of Section 25-F of the Act.” 


Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and principle laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court as discussed above, we 
arrive at conclusion that services of workman has been terminated by the Respondent in violation of provision of I.D. 
Act, 947 and hence not sustainable in the eye of law. 


Therefore, Issue No.I is answered in favour of the Workman and against the Respondent. 


25. Issue No.II:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Issue No.], it is established that the 
Workman had worked for more than 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of termination. 


8608 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Respondent has not issued any notice under Sec.25 N of IL.D.Act, 947 before termination of workman and has not 
paid any compensation as per provision contained under Sec.25 F of the I.D.Act, !947. Therefore, the termination of 
Petitioner from service vide oral order dated 3.3.997 by the Respondent is in contravention of the provision 
contained under Section 25-F of the I.D. Act, l947 and is illegal and not justified and liable to be set aside. 


26. Now, let us see whether workman is entitled for reinstatement in the service or for any other relief. 


In this context the reference of decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant. In Ashok Kumar Sharma Vs. 
Oberoi flight Services AIR 200 SCC page 502 Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


6. In the case of Sita Ram V. Moti Lal Nehru Farmers Training Institute2 this Court considered the matter thus: 


7247, The question, which, however, falls for our consideration is as to whether the Labour Court was justified in 
awarding reinstatement of the appellants in service. 


22. Keeping in view the period during which the services were rendered by the Respondent (sic appellants); the fact 
that the Respondent had stopped its operation of bee farming, and the services of the appellants were terminated in 
December /996, we are of the opinion that it is not a fit case where the appellants could have been directed to be 
reinstated in service. 


23. Indisputably, the Industrial Court, exercises a discretionary jurisdiction, but such discretion is required to be 
exercised judiciously. Relevant factors therefor were required to be taken into consideration; the nature of 
appointment, the period of appointment, the availability of the job, etc. should weigh with the court for determination 
of such an issue. 


24. This Court in a large number of decisions opined that payment of adequate amount of compensation in place of a 
direction to be reinstated in service in cases of this nature would subserve the ends of justice. (See Jaipur 
Development Authority v. Ramsahai [(2006) 77 SCC 684], M.P. Admn. v. Tribhuban [(2007) 9 SCC 748] and 
Uttaranchal Forest Development Corpn. v. M.C. Joshi [(2007) 9 SCC 353]) 


25. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that payment of a sum of Rs. 
I,00,000 to each of the appellants, would meet the ends of justice. This appeal is allowed to the aforementioned 
extent. In the facts and circumstances of this case, there shall be no order as to costs." 


9. The afore-referred two decisions of this Court and few more decisions were considered by us in the case of Jagbir 

JT 2008 (3)SC622 Singh V. Haryana State Agriculture Marketing Board3 albeit in the context of retrenchment of a 
daily wager in violation of section 25F of Industrial Disputes Act who had worked for more than 240 days in a year 
and we observed thus: 


"7. It is true that earlier view of this Court articulated in many decisions reflected the legal position that if the 
termination of an employee was found to be illegal, the relief of reinstatement with full back wages would ordinarily 
follow. However, in recent past, there has been a shift in the legal position and in long line of cases, this Court has 
consistently taken the view that relief by way of reinstatement with back wages is not automatic and may be wholly 
inappropriate in a given fact situation even though the termination of an employee is in contravention to the 
prescribed procedure. Compensation instead of reinstatement has been held to meet the ends of justice." 


Further, in the case of State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Suresh Kumar Verma & anr. 996 AIR 565, three Judge 
Bench of Hon'ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Tt is settled law that having made rules of recruitment to various services under the State or to a class of posts under 
the State, the State is bound to follow the same and to have the selection of the candidates made as per recruitment 
rules and appointments shall be made accordingly. From the date of discharging the duties attached to the post the 
incumbent becomes a member of the services. Appointment on daily wage basis is not an appointment to a post 
according to the Rules. 


It is seen that the project in which the Respondents were engaged had come to an end and that, therefore, they have 
necessarily been terminated for want of work. The Court cannot give any directions to re-engage them in any other 
work or appoint them against existing vacancies. Otherwise, the judicial process would become other mode of 
recruitment de hors the rules. 


Mr. Mahabir Singh, learned counsel for the Respondents contended that there was an admission in the counter 
affidavit filed in the High Court that there were vacancies and that, therefore, the Respondents are entitled to be 
continued in service. We do not agree with the contention. The vacancies require to be filled up in accordance with 
the rules and all the candidates who would otherwise eligible are entitled to apply for when recruitment is made and 
seek consideration of their claims on merit according to the Rules for direct recruitment along with all the eligible 
candidates. The appointment on daily wages cannot be a conduct pipe for regular appointments which would be a 
back-door entry, detrimental to the efficiency of service and would breed seeds of nepotism and corruption. It is 
equally settled law that even for Class IV employees recruitment according to rules is a pre-condition. Only work- 
charged employees who perform the duties of transitory nature are appointed not to a post but are required to 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8609 


perform the work of transitory and urgent nature so long as the work exists. One temporary employee cannot be 
replaced by another temporary employee.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above in the matter at hand, the 
Workman has been terminated long back in the year !997 from the service by the Respondent in contravention of the 
provision contained under Section 25-F. He was working as a temporary messenger and had not worked against a 
regular permanent or sanctioned post. Moreover, a period of 25 years has already been elapsed since termination of 
Petitioner from Respondent service. As per record, Petitioner had worked as temporary workman for a period of 
0 years i.e., from 987 to 997 in the Respondent employment in different spells. Therefore, keeping in view the 
nature of appointment and period of his employment and in the facts and circumstances of the case the award of 
compensation instead of direction for reinstatement in the service would be appropriate relief and that will subserve 
the end of justice. Thus, in view of the above the Workman in this case is entitled for compensation instead of 
direction for reinstatement into service. 


27. Now question arises how much compensation would meet ends of justice. In view of the circumstances of 
the case, Workman has served in the service of the Respondent management from 987 to 997 in different spells and 
has also gone under physical and mental agony during long period of litigation for more than 24 years at different 
levels. In the opinion of the court payment of a sum of Rs.2,00,000/- as lumpsum compensation to the Workman 
would meet the ends of justice. Therefore, the claim statement is partly allowed. 


28. However, the learned counsel for Petitioner has also argued that the Petitioner Workman is entitled for 
regularization in the employment of the Respondent management on the basis of his empanelment in the waiting list 
for regularization. Therefore, the Petitioner is entitled for regularization in the service of the management. 


29. Perused the record. Petitioner has filed the claim statement with the averment that Petitioner had worked in 
the Respondent bank in different spells from 28.7.987 till 3I March 997. But the Respondent has terminated his 
services without assigning any valid reason. Further, it is alleged that Respondent has retained his juniors in his 
services and Respondent has failed to take prior permission from government for any retrenchment. In the claim 
statement there is no iota of the pleading regarding regularization of Petitioner in the service of the Respondent 
management. Further, in the relief clause of claim statement Petitioner has not mentioned prayer for the 
regularization in the Respondent employment. The relief clause of the claim statement reads out as here under:- 


“to set aside the termination order dated /.4,97 of the claimant and direct the Respondents to reinstate the Claimant 
into service with continuity of service together with back wages and all attendant benefits, etc.,” 


Thus, in the absence of any pleading and evidence in support of Petitioner’s claim of regularization in the 
employment of Respondent, the plea in respect of regularization is not maintainable. 


In this context I would like to make reference of the decision of Supreme Court in the case of Ram Sarup 
Gupta(dead) by LRs v. Bishun Narain Inter College and others 987 AIR 242. In this case Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“It is well settled that in the absence of pleading, evidence, if any, produced by the parties cannot be considered. It is 
also equally settled that no party should be permitted to travel beyond its pleading and that all necessary and 
material facts should be pleaded by the party in support of the case setup by it. The object and purpose of pleading is 
to enable the advisory party to know the case it has to meet. In order to have a fair trial it is imperative that the party 
should state the essential material facts so that other party may not be taken by surprise.” 


Hon’ble Supreme Court in several decisions have reiterated that evidence not supported by the pleadings is not 
generally admissible. Therefore, in view of law laid down by Hon'ble Apex Court the evidence presented by WW in 
respect of the claim of regularization in the employment is not admissible as there is no pleading in the claim 
statement of the Petitioner to this effect.Therefore, in view of the above, the plea regarding regularization is not 
tenable. 


This issue is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


The action of the management of State Bank of India, Local Head Office, Hyderabad in terminating the 
services of Sri Gollamudi Adam, Temporary Messenger, with effect from 3].3,.997 is held not justified. Therefore, 
termination order dated ३3].3,997 is hereby set aside. Respondent is directed to pay compensation of Rs.2,00,000/- 
(Rupees two lakhs) to the workman within two months from the date of receipt of this award. Reference is answered 
accordingly. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 6" day of April, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


86l0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri Gollamudi Adam ५७४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.WI: Photocopy of Service Certificate dated NIL 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of representation 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of ack.of representation Ex.W2 

Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+ह./ |2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.ll886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 29 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 4700.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, i947 (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 30/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं0.एल.42042/204/2002-आई.आर.( बी-)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 29th July, 2026 


S.O. 700.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No.30/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of SBI 
of India and their workmen, 


[F. No. L-202/20/2002 — IR (B-D] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 86ll 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 


HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 97 day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 30/2003 
Between: 
Sri A. Appa Rao, 
S/o Ramaiah, 


Totacheria, 
Munagacheria (P.O.) 


Panuganchiproul, 
Krishna Dist Petitioner 
AND 


The Asst. General manager, 


State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, RG-II, 

Labbipet, Vijayawada — 520 003. ... Respondent 
Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 

For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No.L-202/20/2002- IR(B.I) dated = 29..2003 
referred the following dispute under section 0(l)(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal between 
the management of State Bank of India and their workman. The reference is, 


THE SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the Management of State Bank of India, Vijayawada Zone in terminating the services 
of Sri A. Appa Rao, Ex.Temporary Messenger, is justified? If not, what relief the workman is entitled?” 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No. 30/2003 and notices were issued to the parties concerned. 


2. Petitioner has filed his claim statement and as per his claim she has worked for more than 240 days in the 
Respondent organization during the period from ..985 to 34.2.986 but, his services has been terminated 
without any reasonable ground or following any principle and in violation of provision of ID Act of law and prayed 
to reinstate his with all benefits from the date of his actual termination. 


3. Respondent has filed the counter wherein he has denied the allegations made in claim statement by the 
petitioner and contended that Petitioner had not worked for 240 days in 2 months of any calendar year just 
preceding from date of termination. Therefore, the provision of Sec.25F of ID. Act, 947 is not applicable to the 
Petitioner case and his claim statement is liable to be dismissed. 


4. Perused the record. As per provision contained u/s.25F of the Act, the workman has to put in 240 days 
continuous service just preceding from the date of his termination in a !2 month of a calendar year. But, despite 
sufficient opportunity petitioner failed to adduce any oral or documentary evidence in support of his claim of 240 
days of the service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner is not substantiated by any oral or documentary evidence. Therefore, ‘No Claim’ award is passed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant and corrected by me on this the 9" day of 
June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


862 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST |5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 
Appendix of evidence 

Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 
नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 7704.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का ॥4) 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 


केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 


43/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं0.एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर-( बी-॥)-83] 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


S.O. 70l.— In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (44 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.43/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State 


Bank of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/02/2026- IR (8-॥)- 83] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 


HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 43/2003 
[Old ID No. 30/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri S. Devadas, 
S/o Kondaiah, 
Parakondapadu village, 
Gudluru Mandal, 


Prakasam distt. 


And 

l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 


... Petitioner 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 86]3 


2: The Chief General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad. 
3. The Zonal Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal office, 

Tirupathi. 
4. The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Kondepi branch. 

Prakasam District. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. S. Prasada Rao, Advocates 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri S. Devadas who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition 
under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner 
has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to 
this Tribunal bearing ID No. 30/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-026/I/200-IR(C.ID) 
dated 8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 43/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased 
to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 


86l4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases.This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 986 for one year !986 and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about one year. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from 986. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank 
decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- 
listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.!975. (8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9] by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). का between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list 
of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized 
in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide 
hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is 
needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of 
Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 86I5 


specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, |997. The Hon’ble High Court 
also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.l0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after l.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


86l6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99! will not empower the management to 
terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as 
it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has 
engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is submitted 
inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued the 
similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles [4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


(l. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and 
terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3].3.[997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction 
and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.MS5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere 
to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not 
adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its’ instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year l997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all similarly 
situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned termination 
orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these candidates. 
It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the 
Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are 
absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services 
of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3,97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the 
Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 867 


constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.i.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99 as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7.!.987. This is the second settlement. A 
3" settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to !992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the 
provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in |2 
consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a further concession 
entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the bank went a step 
further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on 
the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. 
However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of 
all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another 
settlement was entered on 9..9! herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and 
separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 
considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were prepared 
zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put in by the 
candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.!975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional 
Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived 
between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived at 
and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.!8() of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter called as 57 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned. It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of !2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 


868 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.l886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W4. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the transfer certificate. Ex.W2 is the income certificate. Ex.W3 is the caste certificate. Ex.W4 is the 
conduct certificate. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness MWI Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to ॥]2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement dated 
27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings dated 
9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. 
Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 869 


in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886- 
888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both the 
parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 4" settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri S. Devadas, a 
Messenger with effect from 986 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 


25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99I and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (I) of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) ID. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3!.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3!.3.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 4989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.]997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 


8620 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel 
on 3!.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8() of ID. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 76(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 862] 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9735., The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, !947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section |8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on l986without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
986without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on merit 
it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


8622 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. y. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8623 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., the year 986. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 
“ My service was for total no. of /66 days continuously...... 


I was not sponsored by employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days in a year 
continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged 
in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3I; Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 986 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there was 
direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary 
Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount 0 termination. Moreover, the 
Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 
947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3!.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3.3.[997., There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3!.3.997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by DGM 
that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has been 
terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.]997, 27.3.997 and ३].3.]997 from the service by the Respondent is 
not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager for 
which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from ३3[.3.[997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 


8624 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of LD. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the Federation 
and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would be kept alive 
upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a 
material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the 
Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial 
Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be 
referred to as 5" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life of 
panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant case 
the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8625 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6./982 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2. /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in the 
settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature 
of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(.) of the I.D. 
Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3!.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 
30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3. [997 till last man absorbed has no 
legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January [995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.[997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed 
to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management 
was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given 
chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 
workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness /५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service ina calendar year.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness 
५०७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has 
stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non-messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for 
administrative exigencies. The Petitioner did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 
months.” This statement of witness MWI remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the 
witness ४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil 
eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularization. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of ०७४], the claim of the Petitioner that he was 
refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section l8(l) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.!99l has already been discussed, decided at 


8626 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel i.e., 
3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for his 
absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 09 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.[997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3.!997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness WWI in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8627 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
Statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7, therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review. ”’ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।9३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26. //./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /967 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४४] and ॥७] in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 


8628 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. ४७] ४9०5 that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, ०७४] states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, ५७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the १॥५४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri S. Devadas, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. !986 is justified. Hence, the Petitioner is not 
entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 8"" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 


WWI: Sri S. Devadas MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8629 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


+5.४४|: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of income certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of caste certificate 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of conduct certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.MI: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.MB8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+ह./ |2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 7702.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 


सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 
48/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं0.एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर-( AT-II)-7 7] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 702.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central Government 
hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.l8/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, 
Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of Satate Bank of India and 
their workmen, 


[F. No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)- 7] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


8630 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 


Present: - 


HYDERABAD 
Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the l0" day of June, 2026 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 8/2003 
[Old ID No. 232/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 


Between: 


Sri D. Ratna Prakash 


S/o Vedanayakam, 


R/o Vijayawada, 
Krishna distt. 


And 
l. 


The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 

Central office, 

Mumbai. 

The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad-500 095. 

The Regional Asst. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 
Vijayawada. 

The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 
Governorpet branch, 
Vijayawada 


Krishna district. 


Appearances: 


For the Petitioner : 


For the Respondent: 


2: 


Sri S. Adinarayana, Advocate 


Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


... Petitioner 


..... Respondents 


Sri D. Ratna Prakash who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier 
Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been 
transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 232/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H- 
026/I/200-IR(C.II) dated 8.0.200I and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 8/2003. 


Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 863] 


cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased 
to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 7.2.988 to November, 994 
and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 6 years. The Respondent has terminated 
services of Workman by oral orders with effect from November, 994. Further, it is submitted that the management 
of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent 
appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.li.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after .7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 


8632 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.l.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the years 
995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, 
eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been 
pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.].87 is the [7 
settlement (Ex M]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the a" 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the 
bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court 
of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High Court also 
recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the directions 
given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of the 
agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 499], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8633 


would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.l0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be 
decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in 
less than 240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is 
mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after l.l 982 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement 
in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession 
entered into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |..!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to 
terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as 
it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9.!.99l. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and 


8634 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


terminated the services of the candidates with effect from November, !994 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, 
contrary to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of 
the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction 
and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.MS5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere 
to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not 
adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated !6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year l997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all similarly 
situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned termination 
orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these candidates. 
It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the 
Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are 
absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services 
of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the 
Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, l947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Il.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99I as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 
3" settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is 
mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8635 


settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were prepared 
zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put in by the 
candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.!975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional 
Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settkement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived 
between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived at 
and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned. It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of !2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto |992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 


8636 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was filed 
and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special 
Leave Petition No.!l886-!888 of 998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of 
India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 
is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be 
relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the 
issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. Hence, 
the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to ७४]३., Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI to Ex.W5 are the service certificates. Ex.W6 is the employment card. Ex.W7 is the study certificate. Ex.W8 
is the transfer certificate. Ex.W9 is the panel list. Ex.W0 is the interview call letter. Ex.WI] is the stay order. 
+%.४४|2 is the !992 panel list. Ex.W]3 is the legal notice. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७४] Sri K. Chandra Sekhara Goud and this witness 
has exhibited 2 documents, marked as 55.७] to ॥]2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7.!.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.!996. | Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of !989 Non-Messengerial 
Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MI] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court 
of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP 
No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Governorpet branch in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri D. Ratna Prakash, a Messenger with effect from November, |994 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (l) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8637 


46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३] .3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from November, !994. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3!.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from November, |994.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from November, !994 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 4989 & I992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of 
settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by 
Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary 
messengerial category appointment with effect from November, !994 and it has also been communicated to all 
concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 
3..997. Further, office order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal 
that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in 
permanent cadre, it has been decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or 
temporary employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents 
of the aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by 
the Respondent management with effect from November, 994 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" 
settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. 
Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding 
lapse of panel on 3!.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per 
provision contained u/s.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section l8 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 4707) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


8638 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9435, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section |8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.IL:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on November, 994 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu 


thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under 
Section 25 F of I.D. Act, |947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8639 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
November, 994 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the 
Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.-No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 


Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 


8640 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., November, 994. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection before my 
engagement as a temporary messenger in the branch..” 


“It is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., November, 994. Thus, the claim 
of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, 
in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, [947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated November, 994 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, 
there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 864] 


temporary Worker w.e.f. November, 994. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., November, 994. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from November, 994, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not 
to make temporary appointments from November, !994. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein 
has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.]997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from November, !994 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending 
upon the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the 
Respondent management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the 
Respondent bank cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the 
mandatory condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, !947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the Federation 
and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would be kept alive 
upto March, [997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a 
material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the 
Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial 
Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be 
referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 


8642 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3. 997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.[996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life of 
panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant case 
the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309, therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /9866, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in the 
settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature 
of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the I.D. 
Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3!.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 
30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3. [997 till last man absorbed has no 
legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.l994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3].3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed 
to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management 
was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.[997, The workmen given 
chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8643 


to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 
workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness WWI was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in the cross 
examination the witness WW states:- 


“I am not aware of the settlements between the federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “Jt is true 
that !am not having any documents to show that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 
wagers from the panel list [989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 
Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of I.D. Act, !947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed that 
both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date 
of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(l) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


8644 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १५०७४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8645 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99 were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MW4 states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3!.3.!997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, शेप] states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on November, 
994. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum 
of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M§8 is the copy 
of the statements giving the particulars of !989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 
non- messenger panel, +>5.॥]0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was 
included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could 
not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 


8646 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, ५७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, MWI was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ७७] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the ॥५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri D. Ratna Prakash, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. November, 994 is justified. Hence, 
the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 0" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri D. Ratna Prakash ५७४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.WI to 

Ex.W5S: Photocopies of service certificates 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of employment card 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of study certificate 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of panel list 

Ex.W0: Photostat copy of interview call letter 

5.0४ |: Photocopy of stay order 

+.४४| 2: Photocopy of 992 panel list 

5.४४] ३: Photocopy of legal notice. 

Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.47..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 


dt.9..99] 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8647 


Ex.MS5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.MB8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+ह./ 2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4703.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद 
में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 69/2003) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं0.एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर-( बी-॥)-88] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


99.0. 703.— In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.69/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)- 88] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 8™ day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 69/2003 

Between: 
Sri Surya Prakash Rao, 
S/o Papa Rao, 
R/o Srinivasa nagar, 
Akkaypalem, 
Visakhapatnam — |6. ... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 


Appearances: 


8648 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Surya Prakash Rao who worked as Non- Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Non-Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as 
continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem 
fit. 


2; Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20I4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Non-Messenger from 20.6.86 to !997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from |.4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8649 


bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after |.7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated !6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview” 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the [7 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2" settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2! of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 


8650 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.l 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 865] 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2; Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3].3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!i.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7.!.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 37 settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 


8652 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3!.3.997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8653 


settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claam Workman has examined himself as WWI and no documents in evidence filed 
by the Petitioner. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७७४] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as 55.७] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.! is the working days particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement between the 
staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 4" settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri Surya 
Prakash Rao , a Messenger with effect from 3.3.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 


8654 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.,97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3.[997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8655 


parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3.]997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 79735, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


8656 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3!.3.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, !947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within |2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8657 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98] SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. y. Central _Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.!997. The 
witness ४४५७४] in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 6 days in the said branch in the year 986. 
Further, witness states, “Jt is pertinent to state that I have worked for 267 days during /9266 in the bank and for 
which the service certificates are enclosed. I have been not given more than 200 days in any calendar year inspite of 
heavy work load and just to avoid us to get regularised. The bank calculations of 2 and 3/4 days are wrong. This 
squarely an unfair labour practice.”” As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the 
Petitioner has to adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the 
date of his termination i.e., 3l* March 997. But as per the chief statement of witness WWI, he had worked 
continuously for 6! days in the branch in the year !986. Further, witness has stated that he had worked for 26 days 
during 986 in the bank. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a calendar year of [2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!° March 997. 
However, no document in evidence filed by the Petitioner to corroborate the averment of the claim statement is 
proved by the statement of ४१४५७] or any other witness’s evidence. No single certificate of working days was filed 
by the Petitioner to support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar 
year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., 3l March 97. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he 
has been terminated in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his 
oral or documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४१४७] that the Workman had not worked for 
240 days continuously in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the 
Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he 
had worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.997. 
Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu 
after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the 
documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to 
reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. 


8658 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as 
a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3] .३.]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3. 997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.]997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated I8.!.!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8659 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules !957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3].3,[997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 


8660 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.]997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ॥५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “It is 
not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he did not complete 240 
days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of the service of the workmen was 
need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for engaging his services.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness /७४। 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed 78 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 6! days during that 
period.” This statement of witness 0५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness 
५०७४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility 
criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment 
of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness WW in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do 
not know whether any junior to him were regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know 
particulars of the settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of 
WW in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 
management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that 
the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India 
and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary 
employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given 
appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by 
the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not 
proved by this evidence of ४१४५४], Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the 
temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the 
temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any 
permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent 
Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen 
in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99] has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 866l 


challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3].3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3].3. [997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४४५७४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settkement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


8662 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (I) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
I4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP [४०.।9१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./966 in W.A. ४०. 297 of 7966 क्ाब॑ 25.6. 7/967 in W.A. No.270 of /962., The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on !7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8663 


who has worked on scale wages. Further, ४७४] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MW! states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, ०७] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January !995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. ४७] states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3, [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on |.4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum 
of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the 
particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the !989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ४५७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI and Ex.M2 and 
also contentions made in the counter. However, ४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing 
has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of 
lapse of both the panels on 3.3.[997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to 
the permanent post. Moreover the witness ४७५] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states 
that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut 
off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the 
bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MW in re- 
examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was 
entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found 
not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and II, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Surya Prakash Rao, Ex. Non-Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 8" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 


WWI: Sri Surya Prakash Rao MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


8664 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.MI: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 7704.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण -सह -अश्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट 
(सन्दर्भ संख्या 86/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं. एल.39025/0/2026-आई.आर.( FTt-II)-87] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 704.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.86/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)- 87] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


ANNEXURE 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 237 day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 86/2003 
Between: 
Sri Yeddu Suri Appa Rao 
S/o Suri Babu, 
Bonangi Post & Village, 
Gantyada mandalam, 
Viziaanagaram Dist.. 53560. ... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Renigunta Road, 
Tirupathi. ..... Respondent 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8665 


The Dy.General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Visakhapatnam. .... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Yeddu Suri Appa Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) 
has filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State 
Bank of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the 
consequential benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and 
such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute 
along with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the 
reference was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award 
dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along 
with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court 
vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award 
dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200l and other batch of ID cases by Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India 
was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/20I4 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ 
Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is 
extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 
expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


8666 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 
outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४७.७.)२०.।268 of 20I4 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 23.5.986 to 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about l] years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from .4.997. Further, it is submitted that 
the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found 
suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 
waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 47..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. 8) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months 
after .7.!975. C) (i) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 
months after .7.975. 


3. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. 
The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of 
their respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of 
the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon 
the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding 
to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. 
A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel 
was to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the 
said letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.l.87 was modified vide second 
agreement dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was 
to be given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were 
against the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the 
enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have 
been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, 
“will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 
I“ settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 277 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 
is the 3” settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 
30.7.96 is 5" settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 
marked as Ex M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements 
thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a 
question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his 
services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8667 


to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet 
of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-3/3/] 04/67-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of AP .. 
by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble 
High Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. 
In view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select 
panels prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 99, and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made 
alive upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.[997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(]) read 
with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the 
bank has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to 
exigencies of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary 
employees in subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the 
nature of temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken 
by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair 
labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on 
the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees 
is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 
unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 
Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector 
banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 


8668 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned.The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were also 
considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 
provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 
question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives”. 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It 
is submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would 
have continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles 4,l6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


iI. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties 
and sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed 
for carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled 
in the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the 
Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has 
been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 
7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 
with effect from .4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and violative 
of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so- 
called Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8669 


employees like the Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the 
settlement would be illegal and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the 
discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to 
retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter 
Il of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in 
view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is 
arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is 
submitted that Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' 
instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite 
there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is 
pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all similarly situated 
candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned 
termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to 
engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for 
termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman 
even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3.97 is 
unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate 
and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub- 
ordinate staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the 
restrictions imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent 
bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., 
depending on the availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted 
functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as 
its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary 
service in l2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear 
that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach 
paper specified that the cases of temporary service in l2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit 
of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 
2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired 
they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 


8670 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines 
envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more 
days, the bank by way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had 
put in less than 90 days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 
975 were also considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 
provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the 
approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and 
disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another 
settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended 
upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed 
that while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of 
casual/daily wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. ७ copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with Sec.8(/) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 5" settlement. That on 27.2.!997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3].3.997., That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 
under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of 
the provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is 
in compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3].3.]997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 867] 


have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 
accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original clatmants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 
settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. 
Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.l886-888 of 998 before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, 
reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the 
same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any 
purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is 
covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. 
Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and he has not filed 
documents filed in evidence in support of his claim. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७७४] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has 
exhibited 2 documents, marked as Ex.MI to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the working days particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement 
between the staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees 
and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list 
of various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 
appropriate place in this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 
for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 277 settlement dated 6.7.988, 3™ settlement 


dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 
also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


IL. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri 
Yeddu Suri Appa Rao, a Messenger with effect from 3.3.997 is justified? 


I. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 
Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


8672 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 
executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 57 
settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from .4.997. The extract of the said 
letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
.4.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from |.4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3.3.997 
as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from .4.997 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3].3.]997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 
“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from .4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3].3.]997 is contained in 
the 57 settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of 
both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement 
dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.]997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8673 


Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8(l) of .D. Act, 947 the said Agreement 
dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 If LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 
268(6/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/), 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /68(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 
Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
47(/) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 4/(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 
employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before 
a competent authority under the Act, !947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing 
the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 
challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 4977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 
"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 
entitled to due weight and consideration. 


8674 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 6, ॥9735, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 
accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has 
work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be 
utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(/) of LD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel 
list is allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both 
the panels on 3.3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of 
vacancy of post likely to arise upto 3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management 
of State Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on 3.3.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this 
context, the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been 
terminated from service by Respondent on 3].3.]997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the 
provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 
until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 
of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 
six months; and 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8675 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 
to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 
or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 
this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 
reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 
as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 
reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 
days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 


8676 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 
qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 
because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 
Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (2) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 
whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 
year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 
240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3.3.997. The witness WWI in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 69 
days in the said branch in the year 986-87. Further, witness states, “J have been not given more than 200 
days in any calendar year inspite of heavy work load and just to avoid us to get regularised. The bank 
calculations of 22 and 3/4 days are wrong. This squarely an unfair labour practice.” As per provision 
contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 8 of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner has to adduce the evidence of 
continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3“ 
March 997. But as per the chief statement of witness १७], he had worked continuously for 69 days in 
the branch in the year 986-87. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had 
worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year of 2 months just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3l° March 997. However, the documents in evidence filed by the Petitioner do not 
corroborate the averment of the claim statement as these documents are not exhibited or proved by the 
statement of WWI or any other witness’s evidence. Further, Petitioner did not file any document in 
support of his work done with Respondent, or in support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 
240 days continuously in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., 3l° March 
97. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated in contravention of provision 
contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or documentary evidence. Thus, it 
is clear from the testimony of ४४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 
2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. 
Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or 
payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked 
with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending 
upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8677 


slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on temporary 
basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 
Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the 
force in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated 
from service by order dated 3.3.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the 
work in the branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority 
not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. .4.997. Thus, such disengagement 
of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he 
was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his 
plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve 
months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees 
of 989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central 
office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was 
directed to issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no 
mention in this order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is 
directed to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these 
circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent 
bank by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3].3.]997 
from the service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes 
to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of 
working days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, 
therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from .4.997 and there after. It 
is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work 
and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. 
Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot 
claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of ID. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under 
Sec.25F and 25 B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 


8678 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 
vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 5" 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.I988, 27.0.988 and 9.!.99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 4997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and 
that thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, 
Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.!2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time 
non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 
both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3].3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, ie., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3.3.997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. 
It is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot 
be extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3].3.]997 
in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 57 Settlement entered into between the parties. As 
the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 
Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8679 


issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from 7.6. /982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2./967 to 6.2./9868, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/7 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /968, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 
and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. |The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion 
and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions 
enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the ID. Act, 947, I am of the 
considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and 
plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.[997 till last man absorbed has no legal 
force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies 
falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.]997., The workmen given chance to 
the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to 
other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness '/फ/४] in chief statement has given the evidence 
that, “It is not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he 
did not complete 240 days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of 
the service of the workmen was need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for 
engaging his services.” Although this witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above 
statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness ४७७] was not cross 
examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from 
service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ७७] in his chief statement has stated 
that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. This witness has 
categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed l68 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 69 days 
during that period.” This statement of witness ७०७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not 
cross examine the witness ७४७४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of 
working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, 
he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness 
१४७ in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do not know whether any junior to him in 989 
panel were regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know particulars of the 
settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of ऐै५७। 
in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 


8680 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is 
clear that the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of 
State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work 
put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order 
of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for 
less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of 
the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the 
terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of ४४७।. 
Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as 
well as daily wagers from the panel list [989 and [992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees 
in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent 
Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management 
has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in 
the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3.]997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 57 Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of I'D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(/) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse 
of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim 
of Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 
regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is 
relevant therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the 
Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization 
of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 
provisions contained in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 
regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 
number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 868] 


been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 
benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 
continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 
their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3. [997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman 
failed to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies 
were existing as on 3.3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of 
his seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 
not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness WWI in his cross 
examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. 
The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the 
Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 
provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 
also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India 
would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 
his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 


8682 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 
absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 
Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 
Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article /4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 
exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 27 respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, //. /986 in W.A. ४०. 297 of 7966 and 25.6. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of /982., The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 
temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the 
authorities must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the 
rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation 
policy of the state.”’ 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 
instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ७] and 
MW/! in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on [7..l987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.l99] 
were entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 
994 for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two 
different panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8683 


There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and 
Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent 
absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 
9.6.995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was 
decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MW states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI 
and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in 
respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be 
considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. 
४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part 
time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be 
filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed 
on .4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached 
between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 
3.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the particulars of 989 
non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. Further, 
witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the 
agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from 
time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary 
service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, ५७] 59०४ petitioner was not sponsored 
by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for appointment 
as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the 
bank. Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary 
employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ७५४७४] has proved the documents ४5.७] and 
Ex.M2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the 
witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non- 
absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness ४] was re- 
examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were expired in terms of the 
settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no termination 
of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank 
as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MWI in 
re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman 
that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis 
of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the 
Workman is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be 
dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Yeddu Suri Appa Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 
sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the 237 day of June, 2026. 


8684 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : 000)७ा' 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Yeddu Suri Appa Rao 0४७४]: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.MI: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 
Ex.M2?: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 

Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual 

employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 4705.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट 
(सन्दर्भ संख्या 47/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[एल.39025/0॥/2026-आई.आर.( बी-ग)-74] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 705.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.47/2002) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of State Bank of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-ID- 74] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 
In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 
Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the ]" day of May, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 47/2002 
[Old ID No. 28/200! of Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam] 

Between: 
Sri Karanam Gowrinaidu, 
S/o Adinarayana, 
Vizianagaram. ... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy General Manager, 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8685 


State Bank of India, 
Personnel Section, 
Zonal office, Region-II, 


Visakhapatnam ...... Respondent 


Appearances: 


For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. L-l202/25/2000-IR(B.I) dated 
6.0.2000 referred the following dispute under section l0(.)(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 to Industrial Tribunal No.I, 
Hyderabad for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No.39/2000, 
as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026/I/200l-IR(C.ID dated 8.0.200, requiring this forum to 
decide the question: 

THE SCHEDULE 

Sri Karanam Gowrinaidu who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India Seeking 
for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper suly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier 
Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for adjudication and 
later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ITID (C) No. 28/200l, as per orders of Central 
Government vide Lr. No. H-!026/I/200l-IR (C.II) dated 8.!0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as 
LC No. 47/2002. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 


8686 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(२) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the he joined the service of the Respondent Bank at the workman joined in the services of the Management Institution 
as Non-Messenger on 988 to 997 and rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about !0 years, and 
by dint of hard work till his services were terminated by oral orders with till his services where terminated by oral 
orders with effect from .04.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided to give 
a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by 
offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.!975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these setthements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2! of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8687 


to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7. .87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.l 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after !975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 


8688 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99! wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles 4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8689 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.i.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules !957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7.l.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 


8690 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of 2 months period during |.7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and 46 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as ४5.४] to W24. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support 
of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.W] is the Service Certificate. Ex.WIA is the Service Certificate. Ex. ४४]8 is the Service Certificate dated 
2.07.992. Ex. W2 is the Notification. Ex. W3 is the Interview call letter. Ex. W4 is the Service Certificate dated 
2.04.993. Ex. W5 is the Service Certificate dated .05.993. Ex. W6 is the Service Certificate dated .06.993. 
Ex. W7 is the Service Certificate dated 7.0.993. Ex. W8 is the Service Certificate dated 7.2.993. Ex. W9 is the 
Service Certificate dated 3.05.994. Ex. ४१४]0 is the Service Certificate dated 8.05.994. Ex. ५४]] is the Service 
Certificate dated2.02.995. Ex. १४]2 is the Service Certificate dated 05.2.994. Ex. ४४]३ is the Service Certificate 
dated 2.03.994. Ex. ५१४]4 is the Service Certificate dated 3.05.994. Ex. WI5 is the Service Certificate dated 
08.0!.994. Ex. WI6 is the Service Certificate dated 7.05.995. Ex. ५७४]7 is the Service Certificate dated 
02.02.995. Ex. WI8 is the Service Certificate dated 5.03.996. Ex. WI9 is the Service Certificate dated 
08.0.996. Ex. W20 is the Service Certificate dated 23..999. Ex. W2I is the Service Certificate dated 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 869] 


08..996. Ex. ४४22 is the Service Certificate dated 23..999. Ex. W23 is the letter to Employment exchange by 
Respondent. Ex. W24 is the Circular letter dated 4.07.999. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७४] Sri Aluru Rama Rao and this witness has 
exhibited 2 documents, marked as 55.७] to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..I987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Local Head Office, Hyderabad in terminating the 
services of Workman Sri G. Anil Kumar, a Messenger with effect from 3.3.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 


between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (I) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) ID. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


8692 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3I.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3.[997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section 76 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8693 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 7973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, !947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.!997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3!.3.!997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 


8694 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (7) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8695 


for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained Under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3].3.997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange did not undergo regular process of selection before my 
engagement as temporary Messenger in the branch..” 


“Tt is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year, in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४%४७।] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, !947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3|.३3.]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32, Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3,.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


8696 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.]997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8.!.993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated !6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..!99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8697 


mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967॥ 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./96/7 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3,[997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness WWI was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in the cross 
examination the witness WW states:- 


“I applied for appointment as Messenger, in response to the advertisement issued by the bank and the union in the 
year /997.,.... Further, witness states, “ The panel was prepared basing upon the number of days of service, put in by 
the temporary employees. Some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given 
regular appointment in the bank order of their seniority in the panel...._ Further witness states, “Jt is true that Iam 
not having any documents to show that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW| it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 


8698 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


wagers from the panel list [989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 
Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years 
of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3!.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.!997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8699 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १४५७७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review. ”’ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ७०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 


8700 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


judgements dated 26, /7/./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 ०7966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 


case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3!.3.!997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.!996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on |.4.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, ५७४] 59०5 petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents +5. | to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ५७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ४७४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 870l 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri G. Anil Kumar, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.3.997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. Reference is answered accordingly. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the I]™ day of May, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri G. Anil Kumar MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex. WI to: 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of Service Certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of employment notification 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of letter to CGM (Per) dated l0.0.990 
Ex.W5S: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary 
employees dt. 9.8.90 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India to Respondent Dt. 30..87. 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.M]: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 


regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 
नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4706.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 

केन्द्रीय. सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 

निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह -अश्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 44/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 

[सं०. एल.39025/0/2026-आई.आर.( FT-I) - 84] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


8.0. 706.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.44/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of State Bank of India and their workmen, 


[F. No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-ID) - 84] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


8702 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 


And 


Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 44/2003 
[Old ID No. 243/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri Gujjarlapudi Prakasa Rao , 
S/o Subbaiah, 
R/o Rayapudi, 
Thulluru Mandal, 
Guntur distt. 


The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 

Central office, 

Mumbai. 

The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad. 

The Regional Asst. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 
Vijayawada. 

The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Post Box No.2 branch, 

Vijayawada. 

Krishna district. .....Respondents 


Appearances: 


For the Petitioner : Sri S. Adinarayana, Advocate 


For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


... Petitioner 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8703 


AWARD 


Sri Gujjarlapudi Prakasa Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the 
workman) has filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the 
Respondents State Bank of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the 
consequential benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and 
such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour 
Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 
243/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-026/I/200l-IR(C.ID) dated 8.0.200 
and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 44/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute 
along with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the 
reference was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award 
dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along 
with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court 
vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award 
dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200l and other batch of ID cases by Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India 
was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ 
Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 
as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 
expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 
outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


8704 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४४.७.)२०.।268 of 20I4 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 26.2.983 
to 28.3.[997 and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about l4 years. The 
Respondent has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 28.3.997. Further, it is 
submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed 
personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent 
appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 47..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in l2 months or less 
after .7.975. 8) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months 
after .7.!975. C) 0) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 
months after .7.975. 


3. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. 
The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of 
their respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of 
the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon 
the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding 
to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. 
A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel 
was to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the 
said letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.l.87 was modified vide second 
agreement dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was 
to be given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were 
against the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the 
enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have 
been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, 
“will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlkements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 
[# settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 
is the 3” settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 
30.7.96 is 57 settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 
marked as Ex M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements 
thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a 
question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his 
services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless 
to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet 
of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-3/3३/] 04/67-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8705 


is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, 99], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.!997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.[997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read 
with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the 
bank has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to 
exigencies of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary 
employees in subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the 
nature of temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken 
by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair 
labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on 
the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees 
is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 
unfair labour practice. 


9, The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 
Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector 
banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 


8706 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were also 
considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 
provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 
question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It 
is submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would 
have continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99]. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles 4,l6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


II. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties 
and sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed 
for carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled 
in the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the 
Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has 
been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 
7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the 
candidates with effect from 3.3.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines 
and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of 
India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so- 
called Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such 
employees like the Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the 
settlement would be illegal and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the 
discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to 
retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter 
वा of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in 
view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8707 


arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is 
submitted that Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its’ 
instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite 
there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is 
pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all similarly situated 
candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned 
termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to 
engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for 
termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman 
even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3.3.97 is 
unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate 
and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub- 
ordinate staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the 
restrictions imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent 
bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., 
depending on the availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted 
functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as 
its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary 
service in l2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made 
it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 


8706 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 
9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 
was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 
considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as [992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees.The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with Sec.l8(/) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 5" settlement. That on 27.2.!997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 
under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. he Management bank has not violated any of the 
provisions of the terms of the said settlement. hat the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. hese settlements were time bound and they ceased 
to exist on 3.3.!997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8709 


is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management.Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 
accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles [4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 
settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. 
Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.ll886-888 of 998 before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, 
reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the 
same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any 
purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is 
covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. 
Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W8. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 
documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the Service certificate. Ex.W2 is the employment card. Ex.W3 is the transfer certificate. 
Ex.W4 is the caste certificate. Ex.W5 is the interview call letter. Ex.W6 is the stay order. Ex.W7 is the 
992 panel list. Ex.W8 is the legal notice. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७] Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud and this 
witness has exhibited 2 documents, marked as Ex.M]l to MI2. The details of these documents are as 
follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.MI] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. #5.॥|2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list 
of various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 
appropriate place in this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 
for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

L Whether the  इलालाला dated 7..987, 277 settlement dated 6.7.988, 3™ settlement 


dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 
also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


IL. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri 
Gujjarlapudi Prakasa Rao , a Messenger with effect from 28.3.997 is justified? 


870 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 
Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 


25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 
executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[/) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (I) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3]|.3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 57 
settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3,]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from 3.3.997. The extract of the said 
letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from 3].3.]997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 
3.3.997 as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent 
letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank 
of India not to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it 
has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers 
maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been 
issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this 
effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by 
the competent authority that no one onwards, no _ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the 
contents of the aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour 
has been stopped by the Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 87i] 


panel of temporary workers and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels 
on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5™ settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 
30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and 
conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed 
between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision contained 
u/s.l8(]) of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 I! LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 76(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 79687 under Section 
_68(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section 76(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 
Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
447(/) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 4/(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 
employment, is legal or not.”’ 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before 
a competent authority under the Act, !947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing 
the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 
challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 4977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 
"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 


87]2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 
entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 76, /97935, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 
accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 57 Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has 
work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be 
utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
under Sec.2(p) and Sec.8(/) of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel 
list is allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both 
the panels on 3.3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of 
vacancy of post likely to arise upto 3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management 
of State Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.l is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 

his services by oral order on 28.3.]997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this 
context, the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been 
terminated from service by Respondent on 28.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the 
provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 
until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 
of the notice: 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 87]3 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 
six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 
to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 
or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 
this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 
reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 
as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 
reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 
days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 


874 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of 2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 
qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 
because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 
Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 
whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 
year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 
240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., the year 28.3.997 . 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 
“ My service was for total no. of 766 days continuously...... 


I was not sponsored by employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 
days in a year continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent 
bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had 
worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 
3.3.997. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing 
notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of 
days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily 
wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of 
appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 87]5 


be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 
Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3]. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the 
force in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated 
from service by order dated 28.3.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the 
work in the branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority 
not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement 
of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he 
was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his 
plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve 
months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees 
of 989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central 
office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from ३].3.]997, therefore it was 
directed to issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from 3.3.997. There is no 
mention in this order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is 
directed to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these 
circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent 
bank by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3].3.]997 
from the service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes 
to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of 
working days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, 
therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from 3.3.997 and there after. 
It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work 
and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. 
Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot 
claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under 
Sec.25F and 25 B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 
vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


876 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 5" 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.I988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 4997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and 
that thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, 
Respondent contended that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time 
non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 
both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3].3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3.3.997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. 
It is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot 
be extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 
in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 57 Settlement entered into between the parties. As 
the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 
Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from /.6./982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /98/ to 6.2. /988, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /987 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /988, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 877 


any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 
and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. |The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion 
and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions 
enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(/) of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the 
considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and 
plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has no legal 
force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies 
falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3].3.]997., The workmen given chance to 
the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to 
other workmen in the panel list. 


39. “Prior to my oral appointment there was no notification. I know very well that my appointment as 
messenger was made in a temporary vacancy.” 


... TI used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch. I am not aware of the settlements 
between the federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “It is true that I am not having 
any documents to show that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WWI it is clear that the Workman himself 
admitted that he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days 
than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the 
regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement 
and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of ४४७]. Thus, there is no evidence 
on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the 
panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the 
seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the 
workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before 
it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3.]997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 


878 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(]) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse 
of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim 
of Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 
regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is 
relevant therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the 
Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization 
of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 
provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
Status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 
regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 
number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 
benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 
continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 
their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman 
failed to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies 
were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of 
his seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 
not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness WWI in his cross 
examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 879 


included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. 
The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the 
Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 
provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 
also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India 
would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 
his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 
absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 
Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 
Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 ([) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article /4० the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 
exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


8720 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, /7. /986 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.6. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of 79682, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 
temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the 
authorities must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the 
rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation 
policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 
instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७७४] and ७७४। 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.l99] were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 
for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, ४४] states that two different 
panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
४५] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 9.6.995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the 
said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI_ states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 
entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 4995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. MW] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
३3].3.]997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on 3].3.]997., Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3].3.]997. Ex.M7 is the 
copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 
of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 
is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per 
seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, ०७] 5965 that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 872] 


of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७] 
has proved the documents Ex.M] to Ex.M2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४७] 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so 
as to discredit the testimony of the witness ४७] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent 
post. Moreover the witness ४४] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW] states that 
panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies 
were made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not 
utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners 
were not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 
aforesaid testimony of the ७] in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 
branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the 
Workman is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be 
dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Gujjarlapudi Prakasa Rao , Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 28.3.997 is 
justified. Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by 
Workman sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the 8" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

१४४७४: Sri Gujjarlapudi Prakasa Rao MWI: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.WI: Photocopy of Service certificate 

Ex.W2?: Photocopy of employment card 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of caste certificate 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of interview call letter 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of stay order 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of 992 panel list 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of legal notice. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.MI: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 


8722 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M2?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 
dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

+5. | |: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

Ex.M]2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.lI886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 7707.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-अश्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 70/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 
[a. एल.39025/04/2026-आई. आर.(बी —II)-78] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 707.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.70/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of State Bank of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-ID- 78] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 70/2003 
Between: 
Sri Mutyala Srihari, 
S/o Simhachalam, 
R/o Narsipatnam, Ralli street, 


Visakhapatnam. ... Petitioner 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8723 


And 

The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, 


Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Mutyala Srihari who worked as Non- Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Non-Messenger duly granting all the consequential 
benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other 
reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2 Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute 
along with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the 
reference was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award 
dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along 
with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court 
vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award 
dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200l and other batch of ID cases by Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India 
was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20I4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ 
Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is 
extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 


8724 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 
expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.20095 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 
outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४७.७.)२०.।268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3: The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Non-Messenger from 982 to 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 0 years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from .4.997. Further, it is submitted that 
the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found 
suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 
waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 47..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. B) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months 
after .7.!975. C) (i) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 
months after .7.975. 


3. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. 
The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of 
their respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of 
the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon 
the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding 
to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. 
A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel 
was to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the 
said letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.l.87 was modified vide second 
agreement dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was 
to be given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were 
against the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the 
enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have 
been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, 
“will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 
I“ settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 277 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 
is the 3™ settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 
30.7.96 is 5" settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 
marked as Ex M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8725 


thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a 
question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his 
services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless 
to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet 
of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-३3/3३/] 04/67-र, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A-P .. 
by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble 
High Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. 
In view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select 
panels prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 99, and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made 
alive upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
३3].3.]997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read 
with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the 
bank has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to 
exigencies of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary 
employees in subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the 
nature of temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken 
by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair 
labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on 
the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees 
is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 
unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 
Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 


8726 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 
may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 495 were also 
considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 
provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 
question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It 
is submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would 
have continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99]. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles 4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


II. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties 
and sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed 
for carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled 
in the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the 
Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has 
been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 
7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8727 


from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 
with effect from .4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and violative 
of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so- 
called Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees 
like the Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would 
be illegal and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of 
the Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could 
not have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and 
the said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution 
of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. 
Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and 
therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 
does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to 
brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did 
not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the 
year 995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of 
giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the 
Respondent Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the 
candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated 
that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to 
engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed 
permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the 
services of the Workman by oral order dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural 
justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all 
incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub- 
ordinate staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the 
restrictions imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent 
bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., 
depending on the availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted 
functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as 
its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary 
service in l2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 


8726 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 
2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired 
they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged 
for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the 
bank by way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less 
than 90 days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were 
also considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many 
as possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper 
made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the 
past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered 
on 9..9 herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate 
panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies 
arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, 
they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption.These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 4997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 4957, which is hereinafter 
called as 5" settlement. That on 27.2.!997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 
under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of 
the provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is 
in compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3].3.]997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8729 


settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlkements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 
accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles [4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 
settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. 
Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.l886-888 of 998 before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, 
reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the 
same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any 
purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is 
covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. 
Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and no documents in 
evidence filed by the Petitioner. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has 
exhibited 2 documents, marked as 5+5.॥] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the working days particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement 
between the staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees 
and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list 
of various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 
appropriate place in this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 
for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 277 settlement dated 6.7.988, 3™ settlement 


dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 


8730 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 
also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


IL. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri 
Mutyala Srihari, a Non-Messenger with effect from 3] .3.]997 is justified? 


I. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 
Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99 and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 
executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by _ the 
appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[/) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained १/5.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 57 settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 57 
settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from .4.997. The extract of the said 
letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3].3.]997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
.4.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from |.4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3.3.997 
as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from .4.997 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 873] 


“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from .4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3].3.997, The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in 
the 5" settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of 
both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement 
dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State 
Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement 
dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 IT LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February /9687 under Section 
26(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /650) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 
Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
447(7) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47/(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 
employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before 
a competent authority under the Act, !947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing 
the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 
challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 4977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 
"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


8732 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 
entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 6, /97935, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 
accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has 
work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be 
utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(/) of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel 
list is allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both 
the panels on 3.3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of 
vacancy of post likely to arise upto 3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management 
of State Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.l is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 

his services by oral order on 3.3.]997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this 
context, the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been 
terminated from service by Respondent on 3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the 
provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8733 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 
until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 
of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 
six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 
to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 
or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 
this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 
reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 
as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 
reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


8734 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 
days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has _ laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 
qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 
because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 
Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (22) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days ina 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 
whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 
year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 
240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3l.3.!997. The witness WWI in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 50 
days in the said branch in the year 987. Further, witness states, “Jt is pertinent to state that I have 
worked for 509 days during /986 in the bank and for which the service certificates are enclosed. I have 
been not given more than 200 days in any calendar year inspite of heavy work load and just to avoid us to 
get regularised. The bank calculations of 42 and 3/4 days are wrong. This squarely an unfair labour 
practice.”’ As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner has to 
adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
his termination i.e., 3l° March 997. But as per the chief statement of witness WWI, he had worked 
continuously for I50 days in the branch in the year 986. Further, witness has stated that he had worked 
for 50 days during 986 in the bank. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he 
had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year of 2 months just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3l° March 997. However, no document in evidence filed by the Petitioner to 
corroborate the averment of the claim statement to prove by the statement of ४७] or any other witness’s 
evidence. No single certificate of working days was filed by the Petitioner to support the claim of the 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8735 


Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
his termination ie., 3l° March 97. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated in 
contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or 
documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of १४७] that the Workman had not worked 
for 240 days continuously in any 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and 
documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from 
the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.!997. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated 
by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F 
of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support 
of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked 
intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger 
in the Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 
Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the 
force in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated 
from service by order dated 3.3.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the 
work in the branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority 
not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. .4.!997. Thus, such disengagement of 
Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was 
terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea 
by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of 
calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees 
of 989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central 
office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was 
directed to issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from .4.997.There is no 
mention in this order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars 
do not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent 
bank by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 
from the service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes 
to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of 
working days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, 
therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from .4.997 and there after. It 
is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work 
and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. 
Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot 
claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of ID. Act, 947. Therefore, the 


8736 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under 
Sec.25F and 25 B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 
vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 5" 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.l988, 27.0.988 and 9.!.!99I were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 4997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and 
that thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, 
Respondent contended that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.!2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time 
non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 
both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3].3.]997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, ie., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3.3.997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. 
It is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot 
be extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3].3.]997 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8737 


in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 57 Settlement entered into between the parties. As 
the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 
Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /982, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from 7.6. /982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /9867 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /9868, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 
and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion 
and finding given at Point No. I regardingbinding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions 
enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the ID. Act, 947, I am of the 
considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and 
plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.[997 till last man absorbed has no legal 
force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies 
falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.]997., The workmen given chance to 
the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to 
other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence 
that, “It is not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he 
did not complete 240 days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of 
the service of the workmen was need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for 
engaging his services.” Although this witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above 
statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness ४७७४] was not cross 
examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from 
service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MW in his chief statement has stated 
that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. This witness has 


8738 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed l68 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 50 days 
during that period.” This statement of witness ७०७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not 
cross examine the witness MWI on this point.Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of 
working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, 
he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness 
१४५७४] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do not know whether any junior to him were 
regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know particulars of the settlement reached 
between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of ७] in cross 
examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management 
illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the 
panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the 
temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees 
whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for less 
number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the 
Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the 
terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of ४४७।. 
Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as 
well as daily wagers from the panel list [989 and [992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees 
in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent 
Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management 
has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in 
the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3].3.[997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.|997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 57 Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(]) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse 
of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim 
of Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 
regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is 
relevant therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the 
Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization 
of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 
provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8739 


labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 
regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 
number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 
benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 
continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 
their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman 
failed to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies 
were existing as on 3.3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of 
his seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 
not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness WWI in his cross 
examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. 
The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the 
Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 
provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 
also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and ॥6 of the Constitution of India 
would be a nullity. 


8740 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 
his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 
absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 
Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 
Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article /4० the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 
exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the oe respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, 77. /966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.6. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of 7982, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 
temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the 
authorities must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the 
rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation 
policy of the state.” 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 874] 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 
instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ७] and 
MW! in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988, 9..99] 
were entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 
994 for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two 
different panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. 
There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and 
Visakhapatnam. MW states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption 
depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 9.6.995 
conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided 
that the panels will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and 
All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in 
respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be 
considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. 
४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part 
time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be 
filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed 
on .4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of understanding was reached 
between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 
3.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the particulars of 989 
non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. Further, 
witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the 
agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time 
to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service 
put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW] states petitioner was not sponsored by any 
employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for appointment as a 
regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the 
bank. Further, MW states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees 
from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there were no 
vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ७] has proved the documents Ex.Ml and Ex.M2 
and also contentions made in the counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. 
But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness 
MW/ as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption 
of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness 0४७४] was re-examined 
by the Respondent and the witness MW] states that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send 
absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no termination of any temporary 
messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were 
already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the date of the 
expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the ५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled 
for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is 
found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the 
Workman is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be 
dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


AWARD 
In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Mutyala Srihari, Ex. Non-Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. 


8742 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 
sans merit, hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the 8' day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Mutyala Srihari MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 
Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual 
employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 4708.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4)) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 72/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( बी-77)-79] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 708.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.72/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[ No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-ID- 79] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 9" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 72/2003 
Between: 
Sri K. Lazar, 
S/o K. Osrayalu, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8743 


Tadepalligudem P.O. ... Petitioner 
And 

The Dy. General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, 


Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri K. Lazar who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition 
under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20I4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


8744 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from !986 to 997, and has rendered 
unblemished service spreading over a period of about 7 years. The Respondent has terminated services of Workman 
by oral orders with effect from .4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided 
to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them 
by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on |7.li.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.!975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after |.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated !6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2" settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8745 


upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after !.l 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after !975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives”. 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99 wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 


8746 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles !4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Il.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec |8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules !957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7.l.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8747 


above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99i. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
i2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of !2 months period during |.7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto |992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 


8748 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and 46 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claam Workman has examined himself as WWI and no documents in evidence filed 
by the Petitioner. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness 0४७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as 55.७] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.! is the working days particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement between the 
staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri K. Lazar, a 
Messenger with effect from 3].3. [997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8749 


25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 7966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 76(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 


8750 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3.997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9735, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.!997 shall be filled before empanel list is 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 875] 


allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.!997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3.3.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (7) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within |2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


8752 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur Enamel and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of I2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. The 
witness ४४५७४] in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 6] days in the said branch in the year 986. 
Further, witness states, “Jt is pertinent to state that I have worked for 796 days during 986 in the bank and for 
which the service certificates are enclosed. I have been not given more than 200 days in any calendar year inspite of 
heavy work load and just to avoid us to get regularised. The bank calculations of 2 and 3/4 days are wrong. This 
squarely an unfair labour practice.”” As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the 
Petitioner has to adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the 
date of his termination i.e., 3!° March 997. But as per the chief statement of witness WWI, he had worked 
continuously for 6! days in the branch in the year !986. Further, witness has stated that he had worked for 26 days 
during 986 in the bank. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a calendar year of [2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3° March 997. 
However, no document in evidence filed by the Petitioner to corroborate the averment of the claim statement is 
proved by the statement of ४१४७] or any other witness’s evidence. No single certificate of working days was filed 
by the Petitioner to support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar 
year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., |.4. 97. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
terminated in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or 
documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WW that the Workman had not worked for 240 days 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8753 


continuously in any !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent 
bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 
240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., .4.!997. Thus, the claim 
of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, 
in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3] .३3.]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.[997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.]997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated I8..993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 


8754 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3].3.[997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2.7/966, By its letter dated 7.2./968/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2. /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8755 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.!997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness 0७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “It is 
not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he did not complete 240 
days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of the service of the workmen was 
need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for engaging his services.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 30 days during that 
period.” This statement of witness 0५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness 
०४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility 
criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment 
of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness ४४५४] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do 
not know whether any junior to him were regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know 
particulars of the settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of 
WW in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 
management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that 
the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India 
and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary 
employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given 
appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by 
the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not 
proved by this evidence of १४५७]. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the 
temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the 
temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any 
permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent 
Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen 
in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and |8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 


8756 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3,[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8757 


extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3].3.]997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after ३3].3.[997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
44 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/।997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //,/966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


8758 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3I.3.!997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, शफी।] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December !994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 4995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. MW states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on |.4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum 
of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3!.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the 
particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents एड. ५] and Ex.M2 and 
also contentions made in the counter. However, MWI was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing 
has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of 
lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to 
the permanent post. Moreover the witness ४७५] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states 
that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut 
off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the 
bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MW in re- 
examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was 
entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found 
not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri K. Lazar, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. Hence, the Petitioner is 
not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 9" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 


Petitioner Respondent 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8759 


WWI: Sri K. Lazar MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.MI: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4709.-- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, t947 (4947 का १4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 80/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( बी-॥)-80] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 709.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.80/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)- 80] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 9" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 80/2003 

Between: 
Sri G. Srinivas, 
S/o G. Venkata Ramana, 
Gannavaram, Near Kona Cheruve. 
Krishna Distt.. ... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 


For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


8760 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


Sri 0. Srinivas who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition 
under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20I4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 7.7.87 to 997, and has rendered 
unblemished service spreading over a period of about 7 years. The Respondent has terminated services of Workman 
by oral orders with effect from .4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided 
to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them 
by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 876l 


4. That on |7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex ॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 274 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 3" 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99I, and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8762 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,l6 and 2! of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8763 


liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3].3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, !947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Ii.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7.!.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 


8764 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.I8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 फ settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of 2 months period during |.7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered 
into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3!.3.997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8765 


misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and !6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and no documents in evidence filed 
by the Petitioner. 


2]. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as 55.७] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.! is the working days particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement between the 
staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri G. Srinivas, a 
Messenger with effect from .4.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 


46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


8766 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3!.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.]997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no _ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 764) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 76[4) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section 76(/,. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section 7607) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 46 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8767 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3!.3.997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section उठे (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9735, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.!997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.4.!997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


8768 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
.4.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8769 


calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 

for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., l.4.997. The 
witness WWI in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 70 days in the said branch in the year 988. 
Further, witness states, “Jt is pertinent to state that I have worked for 224 days during /995 in the bank and for which 
the service certificates are enclosed. I have been not given more than 200 days in any calendar year inspite of heavy 
work load and just to avoid us to get regularised. The bank calculations of /2 and 3/4 days are wrong. This squarely 
an unfair labour practice.” As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner 
has to adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., !.4.!997. But as per the chief statement of witness WWI, he had worked continuously for 70 days 
in the branch in the year 988. Further, witness has stated that he had worked for 224 days during 986 in the bank. 
Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar 
year of !2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., .4.!997. However, no document in evidence 
filed by the Petitioner to corroborate the averment of the claim statement is proved by the statement of ४७] or any 
other witness’s evidence. No single certificate of working days was filed by the Petitioner to support the claim of 
the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination ie., |.4.97. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated in contravention of 
provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or documentary evidence. Thus, it 
is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any !2 months 
of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman 
failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in 
calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., .4.!997. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he 
has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of 
Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in 
support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked 
intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of 
appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent 
branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 


8770 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated .4.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., |.4.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated I8..993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 877] 


is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 5" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.[997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /96/7 to 6.2.7/966, By its letter dated 7.2./968/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.!2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 


8772 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७४७] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “It is 
not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he did not complete 240 
days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of the service of the workmen was 
need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for engaging his services.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ४। 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed |75 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 70 days during that 
period.” This statement of witness 0५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness 
०७४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility 
criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment 
of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness ४४५४] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do 
not know whether any junior to him were regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know 
particulars of the settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of 
WW in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 
management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that 
the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India 
and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary 
employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given 
appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by 
the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not 
proved by this evidence of १४५७४]. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the 
temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the 
temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any 
permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent 
Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen 
in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8773 


Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iti) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3. [997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3.3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १५०७४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. Itis not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 


8774 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3].3,.[997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
34 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 ०7966 and 25.6. /98/ in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ०७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3.3.!997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, ०] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8775 


India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December !994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. MW states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on |.4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum 
of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the 
particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ४५०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI and Ex.M2 and 
also contentions made in the counter. However, ४७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing 
has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of 
lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to 
the permanent post. Moreover the witness ७४७५] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states 
that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut 
off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the 
bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MW in re- 
examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was 
entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found 
not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri G. Srinivas, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. Hence, the Petitioner is 
not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 9"™ day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri G. Srinivas MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 


8776 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 4740.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 8/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं. एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( बी-77) - 84] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


9.0. 70.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.8l/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)- 8] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 9" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 8/2003 
Between: 
Sri A. Nara Singa Rao, 
S/o Satyanranayana, 
D.No.58--254, 
Ganesh Nagar, 
Near NAD Kotha Road, 
Visakhapatnam — 530 009. ... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 


For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8777 


AWARD 


Sri A. Nara Singa Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated !7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was 
pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from ..86 to !997, and has rendered 
unblemished service. The Respondent has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from .4.997. 
Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed 
personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 
waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


8778 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. B) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


de Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court 
of A.P . by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High Court also 
recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the directions 
given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of the 
agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 499], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from |.4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8779 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after l.! !982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles !4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 


8780 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated [7.].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and 
terminated the services of the candidates with effect from .4.!997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter II of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction 
and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.MS5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere 
to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not 
adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated !6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all 
similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned 
termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these 
candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty 
of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are 
absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the 
services of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and 
hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential 
benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, l947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Ii.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7.l.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 
3" settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the 
provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 
consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 878] 


240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a further concession 
entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the bank went a step 
further and said those persons who are working after [975 were also considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on 
the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. 
However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of 
all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another 
settlement was entered on 9.].9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and 
separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 
considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were prepared 
zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put in by the 
candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.!975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional 
Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5" settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during |.7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3[.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 


8762 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and !6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claam Workman has examined himself as फैफ] and no documents in evidence filed 
by the Petitioner. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७४] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as 5 5.७] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.! is the working days particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement between the 
staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99! and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri A. Nara 
Singa Rao, a Messenger with effect from .4.997 is justified? 


Il. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
LD. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8783 


46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) ID. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3!.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from .4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no _ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 


8784 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Establishments Act, 966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section 76 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October /6, /9735, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.] 997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.4.!997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8765 


Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
.4.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (7) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


8786 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 72 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. y. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., .4.!997. The 
witness ४४५७४] in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 74 days in the said branch in the year 986. 
Further, witness states, “Jt is pertinent to state that I have worked for 7959 days during in the bank and for which the 
service certificates are enclosed. I have been not given more than 200 days in any calendar year inspite of heavy 
work load and just to avoid us to get regularised. The bank calculations of 42 and 3/4 days are wrong. This squarely 
an unfair labour practice.” As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner 
has to adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., !.4.!997. But as per the chief statement of witness ४ै५७४।, he had worked continuously for 74 days 
in the branch in the year 988. Further, witness has stated that he had worked for l050 days in the bank. Further, 
Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year of 
2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., |.4.!997. However, no document in evidence filed by 
the Petitioner to corroborate the averment of the claim statement is proved by the statement of WWI or any other 
witness’s evidence. No single certificate of working days was filed by the Petitioner to support the claim of the 
Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination ie., |.4.97. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated in contravention of 
provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or documentary evidence. Thus, it 
is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any [2 months 
of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman 
failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in 
calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., .4.!997. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he 
has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of 
Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in 
support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked 
intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of 
appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent 
branch on temporary basis. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8787 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated |.4.!997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there was 
direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary 
Worker w.e.f. .4.!997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the 
Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 
947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., |.4.!997 . 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from |.4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from |.4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and ३].3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 


8788 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the Federation 
and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would be kept alive 
upto March, [997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a 
material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the 
Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial 
Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be 
referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.l.99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel ie., 3!.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /9668, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8789 


dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January [995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.[997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed 
to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management 
was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given 
chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 
workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MW in chief statement has given the evidence that, “It is 
not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he did not complete 240 
days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of the service of the workmen was 
need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for engaging his services.” Although this witness 
was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness /५७४। in 
his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed 97 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 74 days during that 
period.” This statement of witness 0॥५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness 
५०७४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility 
criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment 
of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness ४४५४] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do 
not know whether any junior to him were regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know 
particulars of the settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of 
WW in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 
management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the 
panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. 
Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any 
document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in 
the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the 
panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this 
evidence of WWI. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary 
employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list !989 and 4992 in breach of seniority of the temporary 
employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent 
Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has 
appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list 
before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3, [997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, |947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(/) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 


8790 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.!997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3!.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.!996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness कै] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 879] 


recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.IL, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./986 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MW! in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 


8792 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the setthement. /०७। 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, शफ।]| states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. ४७४] states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3.[997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on .4.997,. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a 
memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels 
above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving 
the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of !989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ५०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI and Ex.M2 and 
also contentions made in the counter. However, ४७७] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing 
has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of 
lapse of both the panels on 3.3.[997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to 
the permanent post. Moreover the witness ४७४] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states 
that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut 
off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the 
bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the 0५४] in re- 
examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was 
entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found 
not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri A. Nara Singa Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 9"™ day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri A. Nara Singa Rao MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8793 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.M]: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. (744.—arehre विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 74/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं. एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( ft-II)-74] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


99.0. 7ii.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.7/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)- 7] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 9" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 7/2003 
Between: 
Sri G. Ramesh Reddy, 
S/o Ram Reddy, 
30--20/2, 
Allipuram South, 
Jail Road, Visakhapatnam. ... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 


Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri 0. Ramesh Reddy who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 


8794 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated !7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.209. | Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was 
pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“7, Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 982 to 997, and has rendered 
unblemished service spreading over a period of about |2 years. The Respondent has terminated services of Workman 
by oral orders with effect from .4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided 
to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them 
by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8795 


minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.]975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex ॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 3 . 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). का between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list 
of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized 
in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide 
hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is 
needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of 
Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court 
of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High Court also 
recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the directions 
given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of the 
agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 499], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 


8796 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2! of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8797 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3].3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction 
and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.MS5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere 
to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not 
adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its’ instructions dated !6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all 
similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned 
termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these 
candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty 
of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are 
absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the 
services of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and 
hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential 
benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!l.!987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7.l.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 
3" settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 


8796 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of !2 months period during |.7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8799 


Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his clam Workman has examined himself as WWI and has filed photostat copies of three 
documents in evidence which are marked as Ex.W to Ex.W3. Details of the documents are given as under: - 


Ex.W] is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the newspaper notification. Ex.W3 is the panel list. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:-Ex.M.| is the working days 
particulars of workman. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 
Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri G. Ramesh 
Reddy, a Messenger with effect from |.4.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 


8800 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3I.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from .4.!997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 880l 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9/35, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3!.3.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


8802 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8803 


calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. The 
witness ४४५७४] in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 90 days in the said branch in the year 982. 
Further, witness states, “Jt is pertinent to state that I have worked for 500 days during in the bank and for which the 
service certificates are enclosed. I have been not given more than 200 days in any calendar year inspite of heavy 
work load and just to avoid us to get regularised. The bank calculations of /2 and 3/4 days are wrong. This squarely 
an unfair labour practice.”” As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner 
has to adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., |* April, |997. But as per the chief statement of witness WWI, he had worked continuously for 90 
days in the branch in the year 982. Further, witness has stated that he had worked for 90 days during 982 in the 
bank. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a 
calendar year of 2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3° March 997. However, no 
document in evidence filed by the Petitioner to corroborate the averment of the claim statement to prove by the 
statement of १५७] or any other witness’s evidence. No single certificate of working days was filed by the Petitioner 
to support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year just preceding 
from the date of his termination ie., [* April, !997. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated 
in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or documentary 
evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WW that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. Thus, the claim of 
the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 


8804 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3] .३.]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. .4.!997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.!997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.!997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and ३].3.[997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8805 


is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Section 2(p) read with Section !8(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./9687/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 


8806 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January [995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3!.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७४४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “It is 
not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he did not complete 240 
days of the service continuously within a period of !2 months. The engagement of the service of the workmen was 
need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for engaging his services.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ४७] 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed 97 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 90 days during that 
period.” This statement of witness MWI remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness 
५०७४] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility 
criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment 
of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness ४४५४] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do 
not know whether any junior to him were regularised in the services. Further, WWI states that he do not know 
particulars of the settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of 
WW in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 
management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that 
the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India 
and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary 
employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given 
appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by 
the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settkement and violation of seniority of panel list is not 
proved by this evidence of १४५७४], Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the 
temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the 
temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any 
permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent 
Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen 
in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3, [997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(/) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7.I.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8807 


Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3!.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3, [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3[.3.[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3].3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४४५७४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. Itis not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 


8808 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./986 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /7966 and 25.6. /9867 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the setthement. /०७। 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MW = states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8809 


India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on |.4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum 
of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3!.3.997. Ex.M2 contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the 
particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ५०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७४] has proved the documents 9.५] and Ex.M2 and 
also contentions made in the counter. However, ५७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing 
has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of 
lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to 
the permanent post. Moreover the witness १४७४] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW] states that 
panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. 
There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off 
date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank 
as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re- 
examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was 
entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found 
not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri G. Ramesh Reddy, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 9" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri G. Ramesh Reddy MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of interview call letter 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of panel list 


880 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
कि. ।: Photocopy of statement showing no. of working days of Petitioner 


Ex.M?: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4742.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 96/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल.39025/0/2026-आई.आर.( at-2)-402] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 72.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No. 96/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)-02] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 30" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 96/2003 
Between: 
Sri K. Prabhakar Rao, 
S/o K. Venkaiah, 
R/o North Amuluru, 
Kavali.Nellore Dist. 
... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 


Bank Street 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 88il 


Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Kavali, Nellore distt. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. S. Prasada Rao, Advocates 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


Sri K. Prabhakar Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated !7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased 
to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


882 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 982 to March, !997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about l! years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from March, 997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 
bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after l.7.!975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99l, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the years 
995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, 
eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been 
pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.l.87 is the |7 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9! is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the 
bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, |997. The Hon’ble High Court 
also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, !99, and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 88]3 


upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from |.4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99! will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 


884 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99l. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and 
terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3].3.[997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3[.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, l947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec I8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 88I5 


above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 
3" settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after |975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9 herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 


886 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.l2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.l886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W4. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the caste certificate. Ex.W2 is the service certificate. Ex.W3 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W4 is another 
service certificate. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७४] Sri I.S. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as Ex.MI to ॥]2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.Mé4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.!996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.MB8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial 
Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MI] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court 
of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP 
No. 886-888 of 998 dt.I0.8.998. 


22: Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 4" settlement dated 9..99] and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 887 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Kavali branch, in terminating the services of Workman 
Sri K. Prabhakar Rao, a Messenger with effect from March, 997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99! and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (L) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.!997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.[997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8() of L.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


888 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 7/966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9/35, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 889 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(l) of I.D. Act, !947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.!997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section |8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on March, !997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under 
Section 25 F of I.D. Act, |947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
March, 997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman 
on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


8820 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph // as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and_ Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection before my 
engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 


“It is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 882] 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. Thus, the claim of 
the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, !947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated March, 997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.!997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3.3.!997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from March, !997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending 
upon the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the 
Respondent management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the 
Respondent bank cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the 
mandatory condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated I8.!.993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8. [990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 


8822 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3].3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life of 
panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant case 
the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2./967 to 6.2./9866, By its letter dated 7.2./968/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8823 


the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ID. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3,[997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3].3.[997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed 
to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management 
was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given 
chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 
workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness WWI was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in the cross 
examination the witness WW states:- 


, 


“Prior to my oral appointment in /967 there was no _ notification.’ 


...T used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch. I am not aware of the settlements between the 
federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “Jt is true that Iam not having any documents to show 
that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of ४४७॥. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 
wagers from the panel list [989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 
Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.[997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99 has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 


8824 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.[997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.!996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४४५७४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8825 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
34 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।०३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9686 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.68. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४४। and MW! in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 


8826 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. ४७४] ४96०5 that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MWI states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, ५७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settlkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the ४५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri K. Prabhakar Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. March, 997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 307 day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8827 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri K. Prabhakar Rao MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 

+5.४४|: Photocopy of caste certificate 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of service certificate 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of Service certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+ह./ | 2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4743.-- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (सन्दर्भ 
संख्या 89/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल.39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( At-II)-03] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 73.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No. 89/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 


of India and their workmen, 
[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)-03] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


8828 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 24" day of June, 2026 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 89/2003 

Between: 
Sri G. Srinivas Rao 
S/o G. Nageshwar Rao, 
D.No.9/294, 
Pampula Cheruvu, Balarampet, 
Machilipatnam. ..... Petitioner 
And 
The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Vijayawada. 

..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


छा 0. Srinivas Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20I9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8829 


aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.20935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 20I4 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 20.9.985 to .4.997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 2 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from |.4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 
bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after !.7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after l.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99l, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the * 
settlement (Ex ॥]), setthement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the ae 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9! is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 


8830 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2! of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court 
of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High Court also 
recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the directions 
given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of the 
agreement entered into on 7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99, and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 883] 


that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3].3.[997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, !997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 


8832 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Il.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99! as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were prepared 
zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put in by the 
candidates during the stipulated period i.e., |.7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional 
Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8833 


completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W2. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the notification. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness MWI Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud and this witness 
has exhibited l2 documents, marked as ४5.४] to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


8834 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of 992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII! is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98  dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri G. Srinivas 
Rao, a Messenger with effect from .4.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..l99l and 


30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. 997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8835 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3.[997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 7966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 76(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 


8836 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9735, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on .4.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
.4.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 


Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8837 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98] SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central_Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 


8838 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


for a period of 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., |.4.997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


, 


“Tam not sponsored by the employment exchange...’ 


“I am not a member of any employees federation and I do not know whether the settlements between the federation 
and the Management will be applicable to me. .... ...”I used to work depending upon availability of work in the 
branch. “Prior to my oral appointment there was no_ notification.” 


Further witness states, “Jt is true that I did not work continuously for 200 days in any year, in my entire service in 
the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., .4.!997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, [947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated .4.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the ID. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.[997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3.3.!997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8839 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3!.3.997 as 


8840 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./9668, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2./966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained १/5.8(|) of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December |996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3!.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ॥५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service ina calendar year.” But the above statement of the management 
witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness ७७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. 
Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is 
untenable. Further, witness MW] in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies 
in the bank on Temporary basis. This statement of witness ५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not 
cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, 
failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given 
regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Further, WWI states that he do not know particulars of the 
settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of ५७ ।] in cross 
examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, 
is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 884] 


3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3!.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3.3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness कैफ] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


8842 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. Itis not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3!.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
Statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3].3.]997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /7966 and 25.6. /98/ in W.A. No.270 of 7962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8843 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MW! in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3I.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ०७] states that on 30.7.!996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of !992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, ५७४] 59०5 petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri G. Srinivas Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.!997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


8844 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : 000)७छा' 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 24" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri G. Srinivas Rao ५७४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 
+5.४४|: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of Notification 
Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.MB8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

5. | 2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.ll886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4744.-- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 

केन्द्रीय. सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 

निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 97/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 

[सं. एल. 39025/0I/2026-3ig. st. (At-II)-0] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 7i4.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No. 97/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[F. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-ID-0I] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8845 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 30" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 97/2003 
Between: 
Sri Kamalapuram Riazuddin, 
S/o K. Abdul Khurdus, 
5-846-2, Modampally 
Mosque street, 
Proddutur, 
Cuddapah Dist. ... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2: The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Proddutur distt. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Kamalapuram Riazuddin who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20l4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20I4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 


8846 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in े.३.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 987 to 3.9.997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about !0 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from l3.9.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 
bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8847 


employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the |7 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlhements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of 3.3.997._ The Hon’ble High Court 
also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto !992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. 997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


8848 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in 2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9.l.!99! wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition २०.49०4/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated [7.].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3!.3.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8849 


jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


43५ Discussions were held and on 47..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99i. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9! herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to l994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 


8850 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as |989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto .4.!997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived at 
and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5"" settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.!997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 885] 


cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to W6. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the service certificate. Ex.W3 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W4 is 
conduct certificate. Ex.W5 is the SSC marks memo. Ex.W6 is the panel list. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४४] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as Ex.MI to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7.l.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.!995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Poddutur branch in terminating the services of Workman 
Sri Kamalapuram Riazuddin, a Messenger with effect from 3.9.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- २) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 


8852 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3[.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.[997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3!.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3.!.997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 IT LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section l8 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3!.3.997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8853 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 7973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.]997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3.9.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.9.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


8854 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8855 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.9.[997. 


In this context, WW in his cross examination has stated that, 
“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange..”’ 
“I did not work for 240 days continuously in any year.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 42 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.9.997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, !947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3.9.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 


8856 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


make temporary appointments from 3!.3.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3,[997, 27.3.997 and 3|.3.[997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from 3.9.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8.!.!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto |.4.!997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from both 
the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is 
filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto .4.!997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8857 


of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2, /967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3,.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MW in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service ina calendar year.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness 
५०७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has 
stated that, “The Petitioner was engaged as a temporary messenger now and then on the oral instructions of the 
Branch Manager. The temporary messengers and Non-messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and 
for administrative exigencies.” Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil 


8858 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Further, WWI states that he do not know particulars of the settlement reached 
between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of WWI in cross examination, the 
claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3, [997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(/) of ID. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3!.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3,.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3!.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8859 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3].3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3].3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १४५७७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।9१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26. //./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /967 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 


8860 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ५७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MW! states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the setthement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.!996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of !992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW] states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents 75.५] to 7+5.]2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness १५४] states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the ॥५४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 886] 


AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Kamalapuram Riazuddin, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.9.997 is justified. Hence, 
the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 30" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri Kamalapuram Riazuddin MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 

+5.४४ |: Photocopy of service certificate 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of service certificate 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of conduct certificate 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of SSC marks memo 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of panel list 

Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.MI: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.!995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

हि. |2: Photocopy of order in SLP 0२०.886-8886 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 7745.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
Gare (सन्दर्भ संख्या 403/ 2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं. एल. 39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( Ft-2)-99] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


8862 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 7i5.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No.l03/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)-99] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 2™ day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No.03/2003 
Between: 
Sri Vinukonda Bala Sundara Rao 
S/o Borrayya, 
Tadepalli Village and Mandal, 
Guntur Distt. 
... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chief Manager, 

State Bank of India, 
Personnel Section, Zonal Office, 


Labbipet, Vijayawada. 


2: The General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Local Head office, Bank Street 

Hyderabad. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : M/s. Nurulla Baig, Advocates 

For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri Vinukonda Bala Sundara Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20l4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8863 


termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.204 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was 
pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in W.A.No.l268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger and worked from l987 to March, 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about !0 years. The Respondent has 
terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from March, 997. Further, it is submitted that the 
management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for 
permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such 
opportunity arises. 


4. That on |7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 


8864 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated !6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2" settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2! of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High Court 
also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8865 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.l 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after !975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99 wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3].3.[997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 


8866 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!l.!987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec I8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules !957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7.l.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8867 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.!8() of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 * settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered 
into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto |992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and !6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 


8868 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as 5. ४४। to W8. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the notification. Ex.W2 and Ex.W3 are service certificates. Ex.W3 is the panel list. Ex.W4 is circular 
dt.25.3.997. Ex.WS is paper advertisement. Ex.W6 is the 2™ panel list. Ex.W7 is transfer certificate. Ex.W8 is the 
caste certificate. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness 0५७४] Sri Rupakula Prakash Babu and this witness has 
exhibited 2 documents, marked as Ex.M]l to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.!995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98  dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri Vinukonda 
Bala Sundara Rao, a Messenger with effect from March, |997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (.) of 
LD. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(4) provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8869 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) ID. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3[.3.]997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.[997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3]|.3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 767) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 


8870 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 7973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section |8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on March, !997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under 
Section 25 F of I.D. Act, |947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as १५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
March, 997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman 
on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 887] 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (6) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 


8872 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. y. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 
“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange.....” 
“T did not work continuously for 240 days in any year of my service.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. Thus, the claim of 
the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, [947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated March, 997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3i.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8873 


wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3!.3.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.!997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.]997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from March, !997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending 
upon the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the 
Respondent management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the 
Respondent bank cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the 
mandatory condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in 
regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.!995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 5"" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.l.99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 


8874 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3!.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from 7.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2./96/7 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2./9668, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(.) of the 
ID. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.]997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.l994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December !996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness 0/५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ४। 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8875 


This witness has categorically stated that, “The Petitioner was engaged as a temporary messenger now and then 
subject to availability of work, to tide over the sub-ordinate staff constraints due to leave vacancies absenteeism and 
other administrative exigencies.” This statement of witness ७७] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not 
cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, 
failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given 
regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Further, WWI states that he do not know particulars of the 
settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of ४१४५७] in cross 
examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, 
is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, !947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99! has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years 
of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 


8876 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3].3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7I, therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
I4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ]४०.।०३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8877 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26. //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /967 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४४] and ॥॥५७४] in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. ७] 59०९5 that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents +>5. | to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ५७४७] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the १॥५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


8878 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Vinukonda Bala Sundara Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. March, 997 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, 
hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 2™ day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri Vinukonda Bala Sundara Rao ४७४]: Sri Rupakula Prakash Babu 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.WI: Photocopy of notification 

Ex.W2 to 

Ex.W3: Photocopies of service certificates 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of circular dt. 25.3. 997 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of another paper advertisement 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of 2™ panel list 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of caste certificate. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.47..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS5: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 


+5./|2: Photocopy of order in SLP ]२०.886-]8886 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8879 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 476.-- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 444/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल. 39025/0/2026-ang.ane.( ft-II)-97] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 76.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No.!4/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)-97] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 277 day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 4/2003 
Between: 
Sri P. Venkata Ravi, 
S/o P. Subrahmanyam, 
Karodupet Village, 
Ulavapadu mandal, 
Prakasam Dist. — 523 292. 
... Petitioner 
And 
The Asst. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Renigunta Road, 
Tirupathi. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Vijaya Shekar Reddy, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri P. Venkata Ravi who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 


8880 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“7, Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(२) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


3 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from |..84 to 3.3.997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about |3 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from 3.3.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 
bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 888] 


suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.l.87 is the 
I“ settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court 
of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High Court 
also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 


8882 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7..67, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


I2; Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8883 


and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3].3.[997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3].3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year !995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.I.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 


8884 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of !2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.!997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.l2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8885 


deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as ४४०७४] and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to W6. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the interview call letter. Ex.W3 is the panel list. Ex.W4 is the service 
certificate. Ex.W5 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W6 is the service particulars. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७४] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as ४5.४] to १॥]2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.!995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri P. Venkata 
Ravi, a Messenger with effect from 3.3.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 48 (I) of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 


8886 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 IT LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8887 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of ILD. Act, !947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.!997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3!.3.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


8888 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8889 


calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3].3.[997. 


In this context, WW in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection before my 
engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 


“It is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3] .३3,]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 


8890 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the ID. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 4989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3!.3.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3,[997, 27.3.]997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from ३].3.[997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 889] 


lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2, /967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3,.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


8892 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


39. In this context the Workman witness WWI was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in the cross 
examination the witness WW states:- 


, 


“Prior to my oral appointment in /964 there was no _ notification.’ 


...T used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch. I am not aware of the settlements between the 
federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “Jt is true that Iam not having any documents to show 
that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 
wagers from the panel list [989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 
Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.[997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(l) of I.D. Act, !947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9..99] has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 09 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8893 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3[.3. [997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १४५७७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
Statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 


8894 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26. //,./9866 in W.A. ४०. 297 of 7966 क्ाब॑ 25.6. 7/967 in W.A. No.270 of /962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MW!I states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.!996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. MW] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 0५७४] ४9०४ petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.M]I to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness १५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8895 


3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the 0५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri P. Venkata Ravi, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3].3. [997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 27 day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri P. Venkata Ravi ५७४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.WI: Photocopy of service certificate 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of interview call letter 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of panel list 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of service certificate 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of service particulars 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 


+5./|2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


8896 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 
का.आ. 7747.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय. सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
Gare (सन्दर्भ संख्या 404/ 2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल. 39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( Ft- I I)-98] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 77.— In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No.l04/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0I/2026- IR (B-II)-98] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 2" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No.04/2003 

Between: 

Sri Pathuri Thomas 

S/o Aseervadam, 

R/o Mandadam Post, 

Talluru Mandal, 

Guntur Distt. 

... Petitioner 

And 
iF The Chief Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Personnel Section, Zonal Office, 

Labbipet, Vijayawada. 
2. The General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Local Head office, Bank Street 

Hyderabad. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : M/s. Nurulla Baig, Advocates 


For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8897 


AWARD 


Sri Pathuri Thomas who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger and worked from 987 to March, 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about !0 years. The Respondent has 
terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from March, !997. Further, it is submitted that the 
management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for 
permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity 
arises. 


8898 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlkement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after !.7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99l, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.].87 is the |7 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlhements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


de Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8899 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.!.982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 


8900 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3.3.l997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its’ instructions dated l6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!l.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7.l.987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 890] 


2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as !992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered 
into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlkements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 


8902 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to ७।३. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support 
of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the notification. Ex.W2 is the interview call letter. Ex.W3 is the panel list. Ex.W4 to Ex.W6 are the 
service certificates. Ex.W7 is circular dt.25.3.997. Ex.W8 is paper advertisement. Ex.W9 is the 2™ panel list. 
Ex.W0 is transfer certificate. Ex.W] is the caste certificate. Ex.W2 is the registration card. Ex.W3 is the marks 
memo fo 0" class. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४४] Sri Rupakula Prakash Babu and this witness has 
exhibited 2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to ॥]2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.| is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated !6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98  dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri Pathuri 
Thomas, a Messenger with effect from March, !997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8903 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.!997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3!.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 67) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 7966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


8904 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 4707) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 7973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.”’ 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8905 


Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.]997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on March, !997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under 
Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५७४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
March, 997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman 
on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within |2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


8906 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98l SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 72 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. ७9. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 
“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange..... 
“I did not work continuously for 240 days in any year of my service.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. Thus, the claim of 
the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8907 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated March, 997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3i.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3!.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3!.3.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from March, !997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending 
upon the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the 
Respondent management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the 
Respondent bank cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the 
mandatory condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, !947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 


8908 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 5" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.[997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./987 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /986, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained 7/5.।8(|) of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.]997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8909 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December [994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ४। 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The Petitioner was engaged as a temporary messenger now and then 
subject to availability of work, to tide over the sub-ordinate staff constraints due to leave vacancies absenteeism and 
other administrative exigencies.” This statement of witness १५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not 
cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, 
failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given 
regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Further, WWI states that he do not know particulars of the 
settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of ५७ ।] in cross 
examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, 
is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and |8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section l8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


890 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3!.3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3].3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3].3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.]997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3.3.!997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 89i] 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //,./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 79866 and 25.6. /98/ in W.A. No.270 of /962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. MW states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3!.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW] states petitioner 


892 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, ५७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५७४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the 0५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Pathuri Thomas, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. March, 997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 2" day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Pathuri Thomas ४७४]: Sri Rupakula Prakash Babu 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Photocopy of notification 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of interview call letter 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of panel list 

Ex.W4 to 

Ex.W6: Photocopies of service certificates 
Ex.W7: Photocopy of circular dt. 25.3. [997 
Ex.W8: Photocopy of another paper advertisement 
Ex.W9: Photocopy of 2™ panel list 
Ex.W0: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
+5.४४॥ |: Photocopy of caste certificate. 
+5.४४2: Photocopy of registration card 


5 .४४| ३: Photocopy of marks memo of l0" class. 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 89]3 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

55. |2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.ll886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 27 जुलाई, 2026 


का.आ. 4748.-- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 448/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल. 39025/04/2026-आई.आर.( बी-॥)-96] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 27th July, 2026 


S.O. 7i8.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( LC.No.l8/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-39025/0/2026- IR (B-II)-96] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 3 day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No.8/2003 
Between: 
Sri M. Raja Rao, 
S/o M.Ch. Koteswra Rao, 
Malakpatnam, 


894 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Nr. Socsite Rice Mill,30/64 A-I, 
Machilipatnam. 
... Petitioner 

And 

The Dy. General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, 

Vijayawada. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : Sri B. Vikas, Advocate 

For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri M. Raja Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition 
under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated !7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondent s, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 89]5 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the he joined the service of the Respondent Bank as a messenger in the year !984 and he worked upto |.4.997. 
Thereby he worked for about |3 years. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided to 
give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them 
by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after |.7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the |7 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. ४-3/३/]04/87-२, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 


896 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3i.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondent s 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7..679, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondent s have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondent s have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 89]7 


as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9.!.!99. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year 995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, !947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


43६ Discussions were held and on 47..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec |8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7.!.87 which may be herein after 


898 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlkement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 * settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of 
the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the 
terms of the said settkement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms 
agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3!.3.997. That the 
bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made 
clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the 
panels after 3!.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 899 


the said settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right 
under the settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to 
be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as ४१४७४] and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W2. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the notification. 


2]. Though Respondent has filed counter, but the contention made in the counter is not substantiated by any 
evidence by the Respondent Management. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for 
Petitioner following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri M. Raja Rao, 
a Messenger with effect from |.4.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


8920 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.!997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (/) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- २) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is 
not in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.[997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no _ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.!997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 767) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7650) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/). 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 892] 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement 
had been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted 
the settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that 
is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of 
the fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since 
expired and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with 
further improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and 
harmony when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as 
fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October /6, /9735. 
The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as 
to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 


8922 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I'D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent . 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.4.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent 
on .4.!997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman 
on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (4) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8923 


non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. The Petitioner in his chief examination has reiterated the version of the claim statement. This witness ऐै५७] ०३३ 
cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in his cross examination witness has stated that he joined as 
messenger at Bazar branch, Machilipatnam of State Bank of India for the first time without any written appointment 
order. Further, witness states that during the period 2.2.84 to 987 he worked for l65 days. Further, witness 
states that he stopped attending the bank service from 997, but he was not issued any written order of removal. He 
did not give any representation to the bank and he has worked as an agricultural labourer. Further, witness states he 
was not appointed as per the recruitment selection procedure. 


Thus, from the above statement of the witness in cross examination it manifests that Workman was not 
recruited by any selection procedure rather he had worked as a casual Workman who was engaged by the Respondent 
for the work intermittently for different periods. Thus, the Workman has not completed 240 days of his service in any 
calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination. Therefore, he has not fulfilled the condition mentioned 
under section 25 F of the ID Act, hence, the provision of Section 25F is not applicable to his case. Further, witness 
in his cross examination has admitted that he did not work continuously for 240 days in any branch, in any year and 
he used to work depending upon the availability of the work in the branch. Thus, in view of the statement of 
Petitioner witness, he does not fulfill the condition of continuous service of one year as provided under Section 25F 


8924 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


of the Act, therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated from service by the Respondent in 
violation of the provision of Section 25F of the Act is not maintainable. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent , I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated .4.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., |.4.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 4989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from |.4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.!997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.[997, 27.3.997 and 3] .3,[997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent . 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8925 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.l.99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, [997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondent s were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2.7/967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondent s that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2./9868, we are of the opinion that the Respondent s did not get any 
right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. 
Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondent s, as 
contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, 
when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 


8926 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ID. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3.[997वा view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3i.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. As regard the regularization, the witness has stated that he do not have panel list, he is not a member of any 
employees federation and he do not know whether the settlements between the management and the federation will be 
applicable to him. Further, this witness states that, he is not aware of the settlements between the federation and 
management and also stated that he do not have any knowledge about the agreements speaks of the absorption in 
permanent position. Thus, from the above statement of the witness it manifests that he failed to prove his claim for 
regularization in the service of the Respondent. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3. [997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without 
any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.!996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(/) of ID. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7.I.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9..99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years 
of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8927 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3!.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3, [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3,[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3. [997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3.3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५०४] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either 
in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


8926 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 Respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" Respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 ०7966 and 25.6. /9867 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. Thus, in view of fore gone discussion and laws laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the 
claim of workman of regularization in the employment of Respondent is not substantiated by the evidence of 
Petitioner, WWI in his cross examination has admitted that he is not aware of any settlements and he is not having 
any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than him was given appointment in the 
bank and he has no document to show that any of his juniors is continuing in service of the bank as of now. 
Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner for regularization in the employment of Respondent bank is not tenable. 
Further, Petitioner failed to produce any document in evidence to establish that any temporary employee junior to 
him is working in the Respondent bank. Therefore, Petitioner is not entitled for regularization in the service of the 
Respondent. 


This point is answered against the Petitioner Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri M. Raja Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. |.4.997 is justified. Hence, the Petitioner 
is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 3™ day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8929 


Petitioner Respondent 


WWI: Sri M. Raja Rao NIL 

Documents marked for the Petitioner 
+5.४४ |: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of News paper advertisement/ notification 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 779.— औघोगिक विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री एम. अय्याला Wt के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघोगिक अधिकरण» श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद 
के Gare (38/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


a. एल- 2025/0/2026- आई आर (aI-I)-62] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 4th August, 2026 


9.0. 79.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 38/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State 
Bank of India and their workman Sri M. Ayyala Reddy. 


[No. L-!2025/0/2026-IR(B-D-62] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 2" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 38/2003 
[Old ID No. 282/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri M. Ayyala Reddy, 
S/o Chennaiah, 
Machavaram, 
Kandukur mandal, 
Prakasam distt. ..... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 


Mumbai. 


8930 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


2: The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India , 
Kandukur branch. 
4. The Regional Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. S. Prasada Rao, Advocates 
For the Respondent: Sri K. Rathanga Pani Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri M. Ayyala Reddy who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all 82her attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner 
has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to 
this Tribunal bearing ID No. 282/99, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026//200l-IR(C.ID dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 38 /2003. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated !7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was 
pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 893] 


management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 25.4.985 to 3].7.98, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 2 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from 3].7.98. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank 
decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- 
listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after |.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99l, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.l.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the |7 
settlement (Ex ॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the ae 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 


8932 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court 
of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High Court 
also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8933 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated [7.].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3.7.98 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year !995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 4997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


8934 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.I.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99 as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to |994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., |.7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8935 


were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3i.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.l886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and has filed photocopies of four 
documents in evidence, which are marked as Ex.Wl to W4. The details of the documents are as under: 


Ex.WI is the transfer certificate. Ex.W2 is the caste certificate. Ex.W3 is the service certificate. Ex.W4 is another 
service certificate. 


2]. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७४] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as 55.५] to 0॥]2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.| is the Settlement dated 7..I987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 


8936 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Kandukuru Main branch in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri M. Ayyala Reddy, a Messenger with effect from 3.7.98 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7.!.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99! and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (L) of 
LD. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3[.7.98. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.7.98.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3|.7.986 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3].3.[997 as per terms of settlements entered 
into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.]997 issued by Respondent 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8937 


Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3[.7.98 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3.7.98 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 IT LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April 963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


8938 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9/35, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(.) of ID. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.]997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3].7.96 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.7.98 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8939 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 


(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph /4 as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


8940 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.7.98. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“ My service was for total no. of 430 days but I have service certificate for 249 days only spread with gaps from time 
to time for the period from /965 to /997 which is Ex.W4..... 


I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and I was not issued any appointment order at the time of joining 
my service. . ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days in a year continuously and I was casual 
worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.7.98. | Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated ३].7.98 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there was 
direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary 
Worker w.e.f. 3.7.98. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the 
Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 
947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.7.98. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3].7.98, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from 3.7.98. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.!997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from 3.7.98 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 894] 


availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 B of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..985 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year |997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.[995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 5"" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3].3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


8942 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2./9866, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in the 
settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature 
of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained 7/5.8() of the I.D. 
Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3!.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 
30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has no 
legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3!.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service ina calendar year.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness 
५०७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has 
stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non-messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for 
administrative exigencies. The Petitioner did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 
months.” This statement of witness MWI remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the 
witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil 
eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of ०७४], the claim of the Petitioner that he was 
refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and l8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8943 


date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I-D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.!99! has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.[997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3!.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४४५७७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlkement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


8944 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 985 () SCC 7[, therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ]४०.।9३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./986 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8945 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४४। and ॥७४। जा chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. ०] states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.7.98. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.MI0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, ०७४। states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settlkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents +>5. | to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the ७५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri M. Ayyala Reddy, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.7.98 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 2" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


8946 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri M. Ayyala Reddy MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


5.४४ |: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of caste certificate 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of service certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


कि. ।: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

हि. |2: Photocopy of order in SLP ]२0.886-8886 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4720.--औघधोगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री टी. नरसिम्हा राव के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद 
के पंचाट (37/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


a. एल- 2025/0/2026- आई आर (बी-)- 6]] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 4th August, 2026 


S.O. 720.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ([4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 37/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State 
Bank of India and their workman Sri T. Narasimha Rao. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026-IR(B-I)-6] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


[भाग II—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8947 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 

Presiding Officer 
Dated the 2" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 37/2003 
[Old ID No. 248/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 


Between: 
Sri T. Narasimha Rao, 
S/o Akkaiah, 
R/o Rajupalem Post and Mandal, 
Guntur distt. ..... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2: The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3. The Regional Asst. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 
Vijayawada. 
4. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Bellamkonda branch, 
Guntur district. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri S. Adinarayana, Advocate 
For the Respondent : Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


Sri T. Narasimha Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner 
has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to 
this Tribunal bearing ID No. 248/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-026/I/200-IR(C.ID) 
dated 8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 37/2003. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases by Central 


8948 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20I4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.209. | Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was 
pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in W.A.No.l268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 985 to .4.997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about |3 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from |.4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 
bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.!975. B) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8949 


consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99l, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.I.87 is the I* 
settlement (Ex १॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 3 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3!.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. [997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: "Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines 


8950 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector 
banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a 
committee constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector 
banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.l 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after !975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99 wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2! of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7.].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 895] 


who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.i.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec |8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules !957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7.l!.87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to !992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


8952 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5" settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of !2 months period during !.7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8953 


Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.Wl to Wl0. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support 
of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the service certificate. Ex.W3 is the service certificate. Ex.W4 is the 
employment card. Ex.W5 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W6 is the panel list. Ex.W7 is the interview call letter. 
Ex.W8 is the stay order. Ex.W9 is the 992 panel list. Ex.W0 is the legal notice. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७७७४] Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud and this witness 
has exhibited 2 documents, marked as ४5.४] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..!987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98  dt.I.5.998. Ex.Ml2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99! and 5™ settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Bellamkonda branch, in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri T. Narasimha Rao, a Messenger with effect from |.4.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.I99] and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (I) of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 


8954 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.997 .” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.!997 due to reason of lapse of both panels ie., 989 & 992 on 3I.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from .4.!997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 7607) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 76(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section l8 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8955 


between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3.3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.4.!997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, |947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
.4.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


8956 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a Strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8957 


answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., |.4.997 . 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection before my 
engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 


“Tt is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., |.4.!997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated .4.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. .4.997 Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., .4.!997 . 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 


8958 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from |.4.997 , therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from |.4.997 . There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from .4.!997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of ILD. Act, !947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, [997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8959 


Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.7962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /96/7 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained 7/5.।8(|) of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.]997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December [994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ॥५०४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service ina calendar year.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness 
०७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MW in his chief statement has 


8960 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. Therefore, the Petitioner 
Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for 
regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the 
Workman witness ४४५४] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do not know whether any junior to him 
were regularised in the services. Further, फेक] states that he do not know particulars of the settlement reached 
between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of WWI in cross examination, the 
claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 09 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3!.3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond ३].3.]997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.]997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 896] 


create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3].3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १५] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.]997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
Statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3].3.]997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


8962 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.6. /98/7 in W.A. No.270 of /962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of 
the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January !995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on .4.997 . 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of !992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW] states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, ५७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents Ex.MI to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8963 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri T. Narasimha Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. |.4.!997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 2""day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri T. Narasimha Rao MWI: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of _ service certificate 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of employment card 
Ex.W5S: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of panel list 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of interview call letter 
Ex.W8: Photocopy of stay order 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of 992 panel list 
Ex.W0: Photocopy of legal notice 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.MI]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 


Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 


8964 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.ll886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7724.—sileifite विवाद अधिनियम 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री कोरागंति रमेश 
बाबू के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, 
हैदराबाद के पंचाट (42/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल- 2025/0I/2026- आई आर (बी-7)-63 |] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 4th August, 2026 


S.O. 72.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 42/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State 
Bank of India and their workman Sri Koraganti Ramesh Babu. 

[No. L-2025/0I/2026-IR(B-D-63] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 42/2003 
[Old ID No. 247/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 


Sri Koraganti Ramesh Babu, 
S/o Bhagyamma, 
R/o Krishna Nagar, 
Tadepalli Mandal, 
Guntur distt. ..... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8965 


3. The Regional Asst. General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 

Vijayawada. 
4. The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Governorpet branch, 

Vijayawada 

Krishna district. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 


For the Petitioner: Sri S. Adinarayana, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Koraganti Ramesh Babu who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier 
Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been 
transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 2247/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H- 
026//200I-IR(C.II) dated 8.0.200I and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 42/2003. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved 
Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and 
set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases by Central 
Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of 
India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy arises. 
This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/204 and batch petitions was 
challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20l4. The 
aforesaid Writ Appeals No.!268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased 
to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated /7.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


8966 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 20I4 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from .5.84 to 3.3.997, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 6 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from |.4.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent 
bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by 
wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after l.7.!975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 7 
settlement (Ex ॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the am 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9! is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlhements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 


[भाग व--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8967 


the agreement entered into on !7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3. 997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 


8968 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9.!.!99. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3!.3.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, l947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction 
and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 
27.2.97, Ex.MS5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere 
to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not 
adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated !6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent letters to the all 
similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to the passing of impugned 
termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these 
candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty 
of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are 
absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. | Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the 
services of the Workman by oral order dated 3].3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and 
hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential 
benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Il.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec |8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8969 


Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 4957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 4975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., |.7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of !2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered 
into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 


8970 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.l2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as ४5.४] to WI2. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support 
of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.W! to Ex.W4 are the service certificates. Ex.W5 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W6 is the caste certificate. 
Ex.W7 is the X class marks memo. Ex.W8 is the panel list. Ex.W9 is the interview call letter. Ex.WI0 is the stay 
order. Ex.WI] is the 992 panel list. Ex.W2 is the legal notice. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness MWI Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud and this witness 
has exhibited 2 documents, marked as 5 5.४] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7..I987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.!997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98  dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 5. |3 is the paper notification. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 897] 


IL. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 
27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Governorpet branch, in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri Koraganti Ramesh Babu, a Messenger with effect from |.4.997 is justified? 


Il. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 (/) of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. 997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3!.3.997. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.!997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 


8972 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


panel on 3].3.[997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 IT LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(7/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8973 


and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 7973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, !947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.4.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
.4.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


8974 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph 4 as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of 
the Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days 
of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and_ Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., |.4.997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection before my 
engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8975 


“It is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., !|.4.!997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated .4.997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3].3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3!.3.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3,[997, 27.3.997 and 3|.3.[997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8.!.!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 


8976 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in 
regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 5" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6./962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2./967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2,/967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /9686, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8977 


conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained w/s.l8() of the 
ILD. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3,[997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness ४५७] was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in the cross 
examination the witness WW states:- 


, 


“Prior to my oral appointment there was no _ notification. ’ 


...T used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch. I am not aware of the settlements between the 
federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “Jt is true that Iam not having any documents to show 
that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the 
Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular 
appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlkement and violation of 
seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has 
given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in 
breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make 
appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the 
Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of 
workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8(.) of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.!.99! has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 


8978 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 09 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.[997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.[997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3, [997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3].3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness १४५७७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3!.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8979 


recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.L, vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court 
have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
I4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review. ”’ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ७०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 27 respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26. //./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ५७७] and ४५७४] in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 


8980 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MW states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3!.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of !992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MWI states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the setthkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents ४5. | to Ex.Ml2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०४४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the १॥५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, Il and II, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Koraganti Ramesh Babu, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.997 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 6" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 


WWI: Sri Koraganti Ramesh Babu ५७४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 898] 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.W Ito 

Ex.W4: Photocopies of service certificates 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of the caste certificate 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of X class marks memo 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of panel list 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of the interview call letter 

Ex.W0: Photocopy of stay order 

+.४४| |: Photocopy of 992 panel list 

+5.४४|2: Photocopy of the legal notice. 

Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+ह./ | 2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 5 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. (722.—aitaifra विवाद अधिनियम i947 4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार Bear प्रदेश ग्रामीण विकास बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री एन.एस.कृष्णा मूर्ति के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट 
(9/2020) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल- 2025/0/2026- आई आर (ai-l)-64] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 5th August, 2026 


99.0. 722.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 9/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Andhra 
Pradesh Grameena Vikas Bank and their workman Shri N.S.Krishna Murthy. 


[No. L-!2025/0/2026-IR(B-D-64] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


8962 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 9/2020 
Between: 
Shri N.S.Krishna Murthy, 
Flat No.20I, 
Sri Sai Lendy Vanam, 
Opp. Sharada Peetham, 
Chinamushdiwada, Pendurthi Mandal, 
Vishakapatnam 53005 .....-Petitioner 
AND 
The Chairman, 
Andhra Pradesh Grameena Vikas Bank, 
D. No.2-5-8/l, Ram Nagar, 
Hanmakonda - 56000I, 
Warangal City & Dist. 
Telangana State ...... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : None 
For the Respondent: None 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. 7//2020 -BI dated 9.02.2020 referred the 
following dispute under section l0()(d) of the ID. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal between the 
management of Andhra Pradesh Grameena Vikas Bank, and their workman. The reference is, 

SCHEDULE 


"Whether the action of the management of AP Grameena Vikas Bank, Warangal in dismissing the services of Shri 
N.S. Krishna Murthy, Ex. Office Assistant w.e.f. 22.08.20I] is justified? If not, what relief the concerned workman 
is entitled to? 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No 9/2020 and notices were issued to the parties 
concerned. 


2; On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. Despite 
sufficient opportunity, Petitioner has failed to appear and did not file any claim statement. Hence, a No Claim 
Award is passed. The reference is answered accordingly. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 6™ day of 
July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8983 


नई दिल्‍ली, 5 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7723.—sileifre विवाद अधिनियम 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 

केन्द्रीय सरकार मेसर्स dat फ़ूड प्रोडक्ट्स; इंडियन रेलवे कैटरिंग एंड टूरिज्म कारपोरेशन लिमिटेड (आईआरसीटीसी) के 

प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्रीमती बी. ज्योति के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औघयोगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (3/2026) प्रकाशित करती है। 

[सं, एल- 2025/0I/2026- आई आर (बी-)-65] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 5th August, 2026 


S.O. 723.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 3/2026) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of M/s 
Brandavan Food Products; Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd (IRCTC) and their 
workman Smt. B. Jyothi 

[No. L-2025/0I/2026-IR(B-D-65] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 5" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 3/2026 
Between: 


Smt. B. Jyothi, 

W/o B. Vijay Kumar, 

H.No.2-5-55, 

Manikeshwar Nagar, OU Campus, 

VTC: Secunderabad, Hyderabad, 

Telangana-500007 ...--+-Petitioner 


AND 


l. The Proprietor, 
M/s Brandavan Food Products, 
D.No.i2-0-42/A, Ist Floor, 
Namalagundu, 
Secunderabad-50006l, Telangana. 


2. The General Manager, 
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd IRCTC), 
South Central Railway, 
S.D. Road, Secunderabad-500003, 
Telangana ...... Respondents 


Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : None 
For the Respondent: None 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. 8/30/2025 -BI dated 3].07.2025 referred the 
following dispute under section l0(l)(d) of the ID. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal between the 
management of M/s Brandavan Food Products, and their workmen. The reference is, 


8964 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


SCHEDULE 


"Whether the action of the management of M/s Brandavan Food Products, Contractor under the Principal Employer 
Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation Ltd IRCTC), South Central Railway, Secunderabad in terminating 
the services of the workmen Smt. B. Jyothi and 30 others (List attached) is legal and justified? If not, what relief the 
workmen are entitled for?" 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No 3/2026 and notices were issued to the parties 
concemed. 


2. On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. Despite 
sufficient opportunity, Petitioner has failed to appear and did not file any claim statement. Hence, a No Claim 
Award is passed. The reference is answered accordingly. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 5" day of 
July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 
Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 5 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. 724.—sileifte विवाद अधिनियम i947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री बी. सुब्रमण्यम के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघोगिक अधिकरण श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद 
के Ware (2/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं, एल- 2025/0I/2026-3TE आर (A-I)-66] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 5th August, 2026 


S.O. 724.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 2/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State 
Bank of India and their workman Sri B. Subramanyam. 

[No. L-2025/0I/2026-IR(B-D-66] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 5" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. _2/2003 
[Old ID No. 274/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 


Sri B. Subramanyam, 
S/o Atchaiah, 
C/o Dhanalakshmi Mess, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8985 


Addanki. 
Prakasam distt. ..... Petitioner 
And 


l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2, The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 


3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India , 
Addanki branch. 


4. The Regional Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, 

Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 


For the Petitioner p M/s. S. Prasada Rao, Advocates 
For the Respondent : Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri 3. Subramanyam who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, 
back wages and all 82her attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner 
has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to 
this Tribunal bearing ID No. 274/99, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026/i/200l-IR(C.ID dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 2 /2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 


8986 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


3 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 0.0.980 to 6.4.86, and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 6 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from 6.4.86. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank 
decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- 
listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after |.7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.!975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, 99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 7 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlkements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2 of the Constitution of India. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8987 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3i.3.997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.!997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7..67, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in l2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


8988 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 6.4.86 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 

management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8989 


violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Ii.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to !992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between [988 to I994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3l.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, !997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Sec.2 (9) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, !957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 


8990 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of !2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.!997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The setthement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.l2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and l6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WWI and has _ filed photocopies of four 
documents in evidence, which are marked as Ex.Wl to W4. The details of the documents are as under: 


Ex.WI is the transfer certificate. Ex.W2 is the interview letter. Ex.W3 is the service certificate. Ex.W4 is 
application to the Respondent. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ५७४] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as Ex.MI to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated 7.l.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.!995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of !989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 899] 


Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Addanki Main branch in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri B. Subramanyam, a Messenger with effect from 6.4.86 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 (I) of ID. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), !957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 6.4.86. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 6.4.86.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 6.4.86 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3I.3.997 as per terms of settlements entered 
into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 


8992 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


category appointment with effect from 6.4.86 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 6.4.86 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 607) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.]997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8993 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.!997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section |8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 6.4.86 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
Fof I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
6.4.86 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (:) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


8994 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8995 


he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 6.4.86. 


In this context, WWI in his cross examination has stated that, 


“ My service was for total no. of 797 days spread over with gaps from time to time during the period from 7980 to 
49686 ..... 


I was not sponsored by any employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days in a 
year continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 6.4.86. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 6.4.86 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there was 
direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary 
Worker w.e.f. 6.4.86. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the 
Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 
947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 6.4.86. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 6.4.86, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from 6.4.86. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been terminated 
from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.!997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.]997 and 3|.3.]997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 


8996 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from 6.4.86 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the 
availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..985 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.[995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.l.99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, [997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3!.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8997 


India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from 7.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /96/7 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./96/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2./966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in the 
settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature 
of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(.) of the I.D. 
Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3!.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 
30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has no 
legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.l994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December !996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७५७४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness 
५०७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has 
stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non-messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for 
administrative exigencies. The Petitioner did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 
months.” This statement of witness MWI remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the 
witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil 
eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of MW], the claim of the Petitioner that he was 
refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


8998 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 74, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.[997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness कैफ] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settkement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 8999 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized. ” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3.3. [997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 985 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ७०.।१३/०9५7, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 27 respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.68. /967 in W.A. No.270 of 79862. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 


9000 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ४७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.!996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December [996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3l.3.997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 6.4.86. Ex.M6 
is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of !989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MWI states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settlkements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents +5. | to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ४७४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the 0५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 900] 


AWARD 
In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri B. Subramanyam, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 6.4.86 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 5""day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri 8. Subramanyam MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


+5.४४|: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W2: Photocopy of interview letter 

Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of application to Management 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 


dt.27.0.988 


Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 


+ह. | 2: Photocopy of order in SLP ]२०.886-]888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


9002 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7725.—sitaitie विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री तेलागतोति अक्का राओ के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघ्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के TPR 
(27/2003) प्रकाशित करती है| 


[a= एल-42025/04/2026-आईआर(बी-)-67] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 725.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 27/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri Telagathoti Akka Rao. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR(B-I)-67] 
SALONTI, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the " day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 27/2003 
[Old ID No. 273/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 


Between: 

Sri Telagathoti Akka Rao, 
S/o Ankaiah, 

C/o V.N.S. Talkies, 


Addanki, Petitioner 
And 
. The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 


Central office, 


Mumbai. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9003 


2. The Chief General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Head Office, 

Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Addanki branch. 
4. The Regional Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, 

Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. M. Srinivasa Rao, Advocates 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri Telagathoti Akka Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential 
benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other 
reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur 
for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 273/99, as per 
orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-l026//200l-IR(C.I) dated 8.0.200 and registered, 
numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 27/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along 
with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference 
was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 
7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with 
batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ 
judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award dated 
7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases by Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India was 
directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.268/204 and other Writ Appeals 


9004 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 
as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 


expedited. 
9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 
outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


J 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४७४.७.)२०.। 268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 978 to 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 2 years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from March, 997. Further, it is submitted 
that the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel 
“found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 


waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9005 


4. That on 7..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after |.7.975. 8) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 
.7.975. C) (0) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 months 
after .7.975. 


3. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The 
Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their 
respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the 
settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon the 
said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding to 
the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. A 
selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.I, the selected panel was 
to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9 by the said 
letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement 
dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be 
given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against 
the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of 
the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have been 
empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will 


be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7' 
settlement (Ex |), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 277 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 3" 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9 is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" 
settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex 
M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created 
reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their 
appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with 
the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with 
the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to 
whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution of 


India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-३3/3३/04/87-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 


similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 


9006 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, 99], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(l) read 


with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank 
has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies 
of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in 
subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of 
temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour 
practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the 
other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is 
not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 


unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 


Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 


may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9007 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were 


also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 


provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 


question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have 
continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99I. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles 4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


II. The Workman submits that in W.P. १२०.4।94/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and 


sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for 


9008 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in 
the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent 
bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached 
and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 7..87 as 


amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 
with effect from March, 997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and 


violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the 
main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore 
liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own 
any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to brought to the 
notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not adhere to 
the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent 
letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to 
the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the 
Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 
Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order 
dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be 


directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, !947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate 
staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions 
imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to 
engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the 


availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9009 


branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which represents majority 
of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as its' members 
espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary service in 2 
calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial Disputes Act, 


947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it 
clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 
period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 
9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 
was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 


considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 


panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 


900 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 4997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with Sec.8() of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter 
called as 57 settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 


under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the 
provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 


violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 90iI 


3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 


accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 


settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter 
the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.l886-888 of 998 before the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference 
to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has 
already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any purpose 
what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is covered 
by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. Hence, the 


reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW] and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as /.] to W6. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 


documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the caste certificate. Ex.W2 is the interview call letter. Ex.W3 is the service certificate. Ex.W4 is 


the service certificate. Ex.W5 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W6 is the service certificate. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has 


exhibited 2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M. is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.Ml] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. 


22: Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of 
various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 


appropriate place in this Award. 


902 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 


for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


L Whether the I* settlement dated 7..987, 2™ settlement dated 6.7.988, 3™ settlement 
dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 


also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


IL. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Addanki main branch in terminating the 
services of Workman Sri T. Akka Rao, a Messenger with effect from March, 997 is 
justified? 

Il. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 


Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[/) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 


course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 5" 


settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 90]3 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from March, 997. The extract of the said 


letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
March, 997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.[997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from March, 997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 
3.3.997 as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent 
letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank 
of India not to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from March, 997 and 
it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers 
maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3].3.[997 has been 
issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this 
effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by 
the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from March, 4997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary 
workers and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.]997 is 
contained in the 5" settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the 
consensus of both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in 
settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3].3.]997 as agreed between State Bank of India 
and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 the said 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 I! LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 


incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 79687 under Section 
26(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 


question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 


904 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
47(7) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47/(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 


employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a 
competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing the 
date of lapse of both panels on ३].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 


challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 


entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 


have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 90I5 


the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October /6, ॥9735, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


I 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.’ 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 57 Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work 
as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be utilized 
for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The Settlement 
dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under 
Sec.2(p) and Sec.8() of LD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position and it is 
agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the 
panels on ३3].3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy 
of post likely to arise upto 3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State 


Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 
Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on March, 997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation 
in lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, |947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, 
the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from 
service by Respondent on March, 997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before 
examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained 


under section 25 F:- 
Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 


until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 


of the notice: 


906 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 


specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 
Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 

Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 

Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 


to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 


this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 


reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 
In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 


reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 907 


Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 


qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


#॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (2) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 


240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 


Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 


908 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 


termination i.e., March, 997. 

In this context, १४४७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 

“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange.”’ 

“Tt is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days in a year continuously...” 


Further, MWI in his cross examination has stated in cross examination that, “The Petitioner has not 


completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.”’ 


This statement of witness ७] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the 
witness ४७७४] on this point. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४४७] and also MW that the Workman 
had not worked for 240 days continuously in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date 
of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and 
documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from 
the date of his termination i.e., March, 997. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated 
by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F 
of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of 
his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked 
intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger 


in the Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 


Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force 
in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from 
service by order dated March, 997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in 
the branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to 
engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. March, 997. Thus, such disengagement of 
Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was 
terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the L.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea 
by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of 


calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., March, 997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 
989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office 
not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from March, 997, therefore it was directed 
to issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from March, 997. There is no mention 


in this order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 909 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do 


not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.[997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank 
by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman 
that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3].3.[997 from the 
service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal 
that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of working 
days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, 
Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from March, 997 and there after. It is settled 
law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work and as the 
work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. Therefore, 
the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot claim any 
right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory condition of 
240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of LD. Act, 947. Therefore, the disengagement 
of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 25 B 
of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 


vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 


set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 


9020 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(l) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.I99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that 
thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, Respondent 
contended that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the Federation’s 
affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial 
vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies 
may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3[.3.|997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3].3.[997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It 
is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be 
extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in 
view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As the 
lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 


Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from /.6./982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 


up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 902[ 


Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /987 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/7 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /968, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 


and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and 
finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated 
therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(I) of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that 
life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman 
that the panel shall continue even after ३].3.]997 till last man absorbed has no legal force and same is 


untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls 
upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given chance to the 
permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior to 
those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 


workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७] in chief statement has given the evidence 
that, “The Petitioner did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 months.” 
Further, he has stated that, “ the Petitioner was appointed as temporary messenger and Petitioner’s services 
were discontinued whenever their services were not needed.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the 
witness १७४७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that 
he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ४ in his 
chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary 
basis. This witness has stated in cross examination that, “The Petitioner has not completed 240 days of 
service in a calendar year.” This statement of witness ॥५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did 
not cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of 


9022 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, 
he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness 
WW/ in his cross examination has admitted the fact that he do not know whether any junior to him in 989 
panel were regularised in the services. Further, फेफ] states that he do not know particulars of the 
settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the statement of ४ै५७। 
in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent 
management illegally, is untenable. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the 
appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in 
breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list 
to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to 
hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and 


there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.]997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section l8(I) of LD. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99 has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of 
panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of 
Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 


regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant 
therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on 
permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen 


to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 


provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 


labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9023 


to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 


benefit would amount to a violation of Article 4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 


continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 


their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997., However, the workman failed 
to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were 
existing as on 3].3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his 
seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also not 


acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness १५] in his cross examination 
has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. The Workman 
failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the Respondent in 


appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels Le., 
3].3.]997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This 


9024 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 


provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and ॥6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 


his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 


absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 


Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 


Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 ([) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article l4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


J 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.’ 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9025 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, 77. /966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of 7986 and 25.6. 7967 in 
W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 


temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities 
must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and 
his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the 


I 


state.’ 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 


instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and ५७४] 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988, 9..l99] were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 
for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७] states that two different 
panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
७४] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. ०७] states that on 9.6.]995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the 
said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ०७७] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 
entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 4995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. MW] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
३3].3.]997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on March, 997. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the 


copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 


9026 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 
is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per 
seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
MW/I states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 
of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४४] 
has proved the documents Ex.M] to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४। 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as 
to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.997 
and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ७७४] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MW] states that panels 
were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized 
after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 
aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 


branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 
This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, I and III, the Workman 


is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 
This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri T. Akka Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. March, 997 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 


sans merit, hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the !" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9027 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri T. Akka Rao ४७४]: Sri .S. Appa Rao 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Photocopy of caste certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of interview call letter 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of Service certificate 
Ex.W5S: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of service certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.MI: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 

Ex.MS: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 
dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.MI0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

+5. | |: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+5./॥|2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.886-888 of 998 dated 0.6.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4726.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय सुरक्षा बल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में dh ljdk visikd ीधा .&सलह& ० ७॥४।ए; ] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान | ak 
38/2022) को प्रकाशित करती है,, 
[a= एल-22043/04/2026-आईआर/(सी.एम-|)] 


जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 


9028 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 


S.O. 726.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 38/2022) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial 
dispute between the Management of Indian Security Force and their workmen, 


[No. L-2203/0I/2026 — IR (CM-D] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri TIRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6™ day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 38/2022 
Between: 
Smt. Atta Appala Konda, 
W/o Atta Appa Rao, D.No.4-2/2, 
Donkada, Aganampudi, 
Gajuwaka, Visakhapatnam-530046 ......Petitioner 
AND 
l. M/s Indian Security Force, 
D.No.6-2-27, 27/A & 28/lF-24, 
Unit 7२०.।24, Ist Floor, 
Down Town Mall Besides Lotus Hospital, 
Lakdikapul, Hyderabad - 500004. 
2. The Director, 
Homi Baba Cancer Hospital & Research Centre, 
Aganampudi (V), Gajuwaka (M), 


Visakhapatnam -530053 .....-. Respondents 


Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : None 


For the Respondent: None 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9029 


AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. 8/7/2022 -Bl dated .02.2022 
referred the following dispute under section l0()(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal 
between the management of M/s Indian Security Force Agency, a contractor of Homi Baba Cancer 


Hospital & Research Centre, Vishakhapatnam, and their workman. The reference is, 
SCHEDULE 


"Whether the action of the management of M/s Indian Security Force Agency, a contractor of Homi Baba 
Cancer Hospital & Research Centre, Visakhapatnam in terminating the services of Smt Atta Appala 
Konda, Ex-MTS is legal and justified or not? If not, to what relief the workman is entitled to? 

The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No 38/2022 and notices were issued to the 
parties concerned. 
2. On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. 
Despite sufficient opportunity, Petitioner has failed to appear and did not file any claim statement. 


Hence, a No Claim Award is passed. The reference is answered accordingly. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 6" 
day of July, 2026. 
IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 
नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4727.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में छाए ljdk vislid vfi/idj.KecY ० Ykly;] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान संख्या 
5 / 2023) को प्रकाशित करती है,, 


a= एल-22043/04/2026-आईआर(सी.एम-||)] 


जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 


9030 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 


S.O. 727.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 5/2023) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial 
dispute between the Management of SCCL,, and their workmen, 


[No. L-2203/0I/2026 — IR (CM-ID] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 5" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE LC No.5/2023 
Between: 
Vadapalli Ramesh babu, 
S/o Nagaiah, 


R/o: 4-32. Srinagar Colony, 


Penagadapa (Rural), 
Kothagudem, Telangana-507030 0 eee ---- Petitioner 
AND 
l. Singareni Collieries Company Limited, 
Head Office: Kothagudem-507 0, 
Khammam District, Telangana 
2. Singareni Collieries Company Limited, 
J.V.R OC-II Sattupalli, 
SCCL Ltd, Khammam. 
3. M/s Sushee Hitech Projects Pvt Ltd, 
Jubilee Hills Road No.2, 
Hyderabad-500 034, 
Camp Office: JVR OC-II OB Removal Contractor. .......Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner: Sri V. Srinivasa Rao, Advocate 


For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate (For RI & R2) 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 903] 


AWARD 


Sri Vadapalli Ramesh Babu who worked as Sany Dumper Operator (who will be referred to as the 
workman) has filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the 
Respondents Singareni Collieries Company Limited, Respondents herein to reinstate the petitioner into 
service with continuity and with all other attendant benefits and pass such other and further order or orders 


as this Hon'ble court may deem fit and proper. 


2: Perused the record. Petitioner has filed the present petition u/s 2A(2) of I.D Act, 947 to set aside 
his termination order dated 3.06.2022, and sought reinstatement into the service. Although the Petitioner 
has filed chief statement of affidavit in evidence but did not turn up for cross examination despite sufficient 
opportunity. Therefore, evidence was closed. The claim of the Petitioner is not substantiated by evidence, 


therefore, 'No dispute’ award is passed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K.Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the I5™ 
day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 
नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. 728.— siete विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में Ath ljdk visiid जाता &७&ह& ० Ykly;] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान Lak 
44928 को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[d= एल-22043/04/2026-आईआर(सी.एम-||)] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 


S.O. 728.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 4/2026) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute 
between the Management of SCCL, and their workmen, 


[No. L-2203/0/2026 — IR (CM-ID] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 


9032 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present:- Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 5" day of February, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 4/2026 
Between: 
Shri M. David Kumar, 
Dr. No. -85-7/2, Siri Residency, 
APHB Colony, Housing Board, 
West Godavari District, 
Andhra Pradesh - 5340]. 


....Petitioner 
AND 
l. M/s. Kadali Venkateswara Rao Security Agency, 
Rep. By Shri Kadali Venkateswara Rao, Prop, 
D.No.3-05/l, Pandiripuram oe Lane, 
Chilakaluripeta Town, 
Paladu District, Andhra Pradesh — 52266. 
2. Food Corporation of India, 
Represented by Divisional Manager, 
Divisional Office, 
Eluru District, Andhra Pradesh — 53400I. .....Respondents 


Appearances: 
For the Petitioner: None 


For the Respondent: None 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. 8/34/2025-BI dated 29.0.2025 
referred the following dispute under section 0()(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal 
between the management of M/s. Kadali Venkateswara Rao Security Agency contractor of Food 


Corporation of India, and their workman. The reference is, 
SCHEDULE 


l. “Whether the action of the employer M/s. Kadali Venkateswara Rao Security Agency, contractor 
of Food Corporation of India, Divisional Office, Eluru in terminating the services of the workman 
Shri M. David Kumar is justified? If not, what relief is the workman entitled? If yes, to what 


terminal benefits is the workman entitled? 


2. Whether the action of the employer M/s. Kadali Venkateswara Rao Security Agency, contractor of 


Food Corporation of India, Divisional Office, Eluru in discharging or dismissing the workman 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9033 


amounts to unfair labour practice within the meaning of item 5 of part I of the Fifth Schedule of the 


Industrial Disputes Act, |947, if so, to what relief, the workman is entitled to.” 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No 4/2026 and notices were issued to the parties 


concerned. 


2. On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. Notice 
issued to the Petitioner was returned with the endorsement “No such person found at the address.” Service 
upon the Petitioner is held to be sufficient. No other address of the Petitioner is available on record. Since 
the Petitioner has failed to file any claim statement despite sufficient opportunity, a ‘No Claim Award’ is 


passed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 
57 day of February, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 
नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. 4729.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में dt ljdk vislid vf/idj.KazG ० Ykly;] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान Lak 
VAD को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[a= एल-22043/04/2026-आईआर(सी.एम-।|)] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 


S.O. 729.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 4/2020) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial 
dispute between the Management of SCCL, and their workmen, 


[No. L-2203/0/2026 — IR (CM-ID] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 


9034 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 
Present:- Sri TIRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 8" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. ।/2020 
Between: 
Sri Gunda Rajulu, Ex-Coal Filler, 
KKS5 Incline, SCC Ltd., 2™ Incline Basti, 


Asifabad, Adilabad District — 50425] ......Petitioner 
AND 

The General Manager, 

M/s Singreni Collieries Co. Ltd, 

Mandamarri Area, Mancherial District ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 


For the Petitioner : None 


For the Respondent: None 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. /20/209-BI dated 24.0.209 
referred the following dispute under section 0(/)(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal 


between the management of M/s Singreni Collieries Co. Ltd and their workman. The reference is, 
SCHEDULE 


"Whether the action of the management of M/s Singreni Collieries Co. Ltd, KK-5 Mine in terminating the 
services of Sri gunda Rajulu, Ex-Coal Filler w.e.f. 26.09.200] is justified or not. If not, to what relief the 


workman is entitled to ?” 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No [/2020 and notices were issued to the parties 


concerned. 


2. On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. Notice 
issued to the Petitioner has been returned unserved with the endorsement, "No such person; address left. 
Returned to sender." Despite the issuance of notice, the Petitioner has remained absent. In the absence of 


the claim statement, a No Claim Award is passed. The reference is answered accordingly. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 8" 
day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9035 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 
नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. (730.—sileiftra विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में dthh ljdk visikd vi/idj.KacG e Yk ly; ] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान Lak 
6209 को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[a= Wet-2202/26/208-arsare (At. TH-II)] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 


S.O. 730.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 6/20I8) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial 
dispute between the Management of SCCL, and their workmen, 

[No. L-2202/26/208 — IR (CM-ID] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri TIRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 20" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 6/208 
Between: 
Sri Routhu Kanakaiah, 
Ex-Badli Filler, 
H. No. 2-4-26, Radhagambala Basthi, 
Bellampalli (V&M) District, 
Mancherial—50425)000  र रर<यरय<य<य<य<-य-य-यऑआऑय्ञ्_्ञथ्ञ्ञ्ञ्ञञ Petitioner 


9036 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AND 

The General Manager, 

M/s Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd., 
Sreerampur Area, 


Sreerampur — Dist. 


Mancherial- 504303 0 ॒_य्य्य्य्प््््झ॒..-- Respondent 

Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : None 

For the Respondent: M/s P.A.V.V.S. Sarma, Advocates 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. L-2202/26/20I8 — IR(CM-ID 
dated 22..208 referred the following dispute under section 0(l)(d) of the LD. Act, 947 for 
adjudication to this Tribunal between the management of M/s Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd, and their 
workman. The reference is, 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of The General Manager, M/s Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd., Sreerampur area, 
Manchrial Dist. (TS) in terminating the services of Sri Routhu Kanakaiah, Ex-Badli Filler, RK-6 inc., 
SCCL, Sreerampur area with effect from 3.0.998 is justified or not? If not, to what relief the applicant 
is entitled for?" 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as ID. No 6/20l8 and notices were issued to the 
parties concerned. 


2. On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. Despite 
service of notice and sufficient opportunity didn't filed any claim statement. Petitioner opportunity closed. 
Petitioner has failed to appear and did not file any claim statement. Hence, in absence of claim statement 
‘no claim’ Award is passed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 20" 
day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9037 


नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. (734.—silenhre विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में dthh ljdk viskkd रीता .6सह&्ष ० Ykly;] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान | Bk 
730205 को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[a= एल-22042/39/2045-आईआर(सी.एम-।|)] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 


S.O. 73.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 73/20I5) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial 


dispute between the Management of SCCL,, and their workmen, 
[No. L-2202/39/205 — IR (CM-ID] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri TIRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 227९ day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 73/205 
Between: 
Sri Md. Rabbani, 
S/o M.A. Gani, 
H. No. 9--28, Shombonipet (unertly, Gate), 
Warangal (M) — 506005 
Warangal Distt. (Telangana State) 
Warangal - Petitioner 
AND 
The General Manager, 
M/s Singareni Collieries Company Limited, 
Ramagundam — I Area, Godavarikhani — 505209 
Karimnagar Distt. (Telangana State). 


Karimnagar (Telangana)- eee Respondent 


9038 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : M/s. A. Sarojana & K.Vasudeva Reddy, Advocates 

For the Respondent: M/s. Nandigam Krishna Rao & N.S. Pattabhi Rama Rao, Advocates 
AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. L-2202/39/205 (IR(CM-ID) dated 
29.07.20I5 referred the following dispute under section 0()(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 for adjudication to 
this Tribunal between the management of M/s Singareni Collieries Company Limited, and their workman. 


The reference is, 
SCHEDULE 


Whether the action of the General Manager, M/S. Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd., Ramagundam-] 
Area, Godavarikhani, Karimnagar Dist., in terminating the services of Shri Md. Rabbani, Coal Filler, 
GDK-! & 3 Inc., SCCL, Ramagundam-I Area, Godavarikhani with the effect from 29/03/200] is justified 


or not? If not, to what relief the applicant is entitled for?” 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No 73/20I5 and notices were issued to the 


parties concerned. 


2. On the date fixed for Petitioner evidence, Petitioner remained absent. Despite sufficient 
opportunity accorded to the Petitioner, he did not adduce any evidence in support of his claim, opportunity 
closed. The claim of Petitioner has not been substantiated by any evidence, hence, 'No-Claim' award is 


passed. Reference is answered accordingly. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 
22" day of July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9039 


नई दिल्‍ली, 8 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4732.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस सी सी एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में dthh [ता visl&id vf/idj.KacG ० Ykly;] हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान | Bk 
D@25 को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[a= एल-22042/84/2044-आईआर(सी.एम-||)] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 8th August, 2026 

S.O. 732.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 4/20I5) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial 

dispute between the Management of SCCL,, and their workmen, 
[No. L-2202/84/2026-IR(CM-ID] 
JAIDEEP YADAV, Dy. Director 

ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri TIRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 2" day of February, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 4/205 
Between: 


The President (Sri Bandari Satyanarayana), 


Telengana Trade Union Council. 


Raj Kumar Complex, Sai Baba Temple Road, 
Jaffer nagar. Mancherial -504208. 


Adilabad Dist ......Petitioner 
AND 

The General Manager, 

M/s Singreni Collieries Co. Ltd, 

Sreerampur Area, 

Sreerampur - 504303 ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 

For the Petitioner : None 


For the Respondent: None 


9040 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. L-2202/84/204 (IR(CM-ID) dated 
23.0.205 referred the following dispute under section 0()(d) of the I.D. Act, 947 for adjudication to 
this Tribunal between the management of M/s Singreni Collieries Co. Ltd and their workman. The 


reference is, 
SCHEDULE 


"Whether the action of General Manager, M/s. Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd., Mandamarri Area, 
Mandamarri, Adilabad Distt. in terminating the services/Disempannelling the service of Sri Karre 
Thirupathi, Ex- Badly Coal Filler. MK-4 Inc., Mandamarri Area with effect from 09.0.998 is justified or 
not? If not, to what relief the applicant is entitled for?" 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No I/20I5 and notices were issued to the 


parties concerned. 


2. On the date fixed for appearance and filing of claim statement Petitioner remained absent. Despite 
service of notice and sufficient opportunity being afforded, the petitioner failed to file any claim statement. 
It seems petitioner do not want to prosecute his case. Therefore, ‘no-claim’ award is passed. Reference is 


ordered accordingly. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 
2™ day of February, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


NIL 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7733.—sitaitre विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री गौड़ापेरी लिंगयाह॒ के बीच अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट औघोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण / श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के ॥ छो$/ 
(30/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[a= एल-42025/04/2026-आईआर(बी-॥)-68] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 904[ 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 733.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 30/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri Gowdaperi Lingaiah. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR(B-I)-68] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 30/2003 
[Old ID No. 270/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri Gowdaperi Lingaiah, 
S/o Adam, 
Sundar Nagar, 
Pakala Road, S. Konda, 
Prakasam distt. 
... Petitioner 

And 
l. The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 

Central office, 

Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 


Kandukur branch. 


9042 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


4. The Regional Manager, 
State Bank of India, 


Zonal office, 


Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri K. Rathanga Pani Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Gowdaperi Lingaiah who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits 
such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this 
court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for 
adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 270/99, as per orders 
of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026//200l-IR(C.ID dated 8.0.200 and registered, numbered in 
this Tribunal as LC No. 30/2003. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along 
with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference 
was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 
7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with 
batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ 
judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award dated 
7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases by Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India was 
directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals 
were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.20I9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 


as below:- 


“ 7, Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 


will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9043 


Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 


expedited. 
9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.20095 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 


outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 
(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४/.७.)२०.।268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from December, 
985 to 6.4.86 and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 2 years. The 
Respondent has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 6.4.86. Further, it is 
submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed 
personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent 


appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 47..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. 8) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 
.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 months 
after .7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 


permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 


9044 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The 
Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their 
respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of the 
settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon the 
said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding to 
the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. A 
selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was 
to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9] by the said 
letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement 
dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be 
given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against 
the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of 
the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have been 
empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will 


be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7' 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9 is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 
settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex 
M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created 
reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their 
appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working 
with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized 
with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing 
person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2 of the 


Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, 99], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9045 


6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8() read 


with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank 
has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies 
of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in 
subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of 
temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour 
practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the 
other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is 
not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 


unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 


Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 


may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after . 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 


beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 


9046 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were also 


considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 


provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 


question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It 
is submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would 
have continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.4!94/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99]. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles 4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and 
sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for 
carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in 
the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent 
bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached 
and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 7..87 as 


amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 


absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9047 


candidates with effect from 3].3.]997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines 
and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution 
of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, 
the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore 
liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own 
any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to brought to the 
notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not adhere to 
the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent 
letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to 
the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the 
Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 
Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order 
dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be 


directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub- 
ordinate staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the 
restrictions imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent 
bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., 
depending on the availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted 
functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as 
its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary 
service in l2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 


Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 


in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 


9048 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made 
it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 
period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 
9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 
was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 


considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 4997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 


called as 57 settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9049 


federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 


under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of 
the provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 


accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 


allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 


9050 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 


settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. 
Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.ll886-888 of 998 before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, 
reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the 
same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any 
purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is 
covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. 


Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW] and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W3. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 


documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 
Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the caste certificate. Ex.W3 is the transfer certificate. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has 


exhibited [2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M. is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.MII! is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of 
various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 


appropriate place in this Award. 
23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 


for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement 
dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 


also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


II. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Kandukur branch, in terminating the services of 


Workman Sri Gowdaperi Lingaiah, a Messenger with effect from 6.4.86 is justified? 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 905[ 


II. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 


Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 


appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 
Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 


course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained 7/5.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 5" 


settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from ३].3.[997. The extract of the said 


letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3].3. [997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 


messengerial category from 3] .3.[997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3.3.997 


9052 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from 3.3.997 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 
“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in 
the 57 settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of 
both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement 
dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State 
Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8() of ID. Act, 947 the said Agreement 
dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 I! LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 


incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 7987 under Section 
26(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section 7607) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 


Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
44(/) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47/(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 


employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 


terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9053 


competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing the 
date of lapse of both panels on ३].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 


challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 


entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 76, ॥97935, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


3 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.’ 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 57 Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 


union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 


9054 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work 
as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be utilized 
for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The Settlement 
dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under 
Sec.2(p) and Sec.8() of ILD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position and it is 
agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.]997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the 
panels on ३].3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy 
of post likely to arise upto 3].3.[997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State 


Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 
Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on 6.4.86 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, 
the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from 
service by Respondent on 6.4.86 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before 
examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained 


under section 25 F:- 
Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 
until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 
of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 


specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 
Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 

Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 

Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 


uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9055 


leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 


to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 


this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 


reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 
In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 498] SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 


clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 


9056 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 


qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 


240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


In this context, १४४७७] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“ My service was for total no. of /77 days spread over with gaps from time to time duringthe period from 


I was not sponsored by employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days 


in a year continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9057 


payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked 
with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending 
upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary 
slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on 


temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 


Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force 
in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from 
service by order dated 6.4.86 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the 
branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage 
any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman 
does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated 
in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral 
or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of calendar 


year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.]997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 
989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office 
not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.997, therefore it was directed to 
issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from 3.3.997. There is no mention in 


this order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do 


not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.[997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank 
by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman 
that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the 
service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal 
that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of working 
days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, 
Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from 3.3.997 and there after. It is settled 
law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work and as the 


work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. Therefore, 


9058 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot claim any 
right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory condition of 
240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the disengagement 
of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 25 B 
of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 


vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7.I.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.I99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that 
thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 


attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9059 


Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time 
non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3[.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3.3.997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It 
is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be 
extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in 
view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As the 
lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 


Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court 
have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from 7.6. /982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /987 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/7 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /9868, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 


and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and 


finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated 


9060 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.8(/) of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that 
life of panels lapsed on ३3].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman 
that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has no legal force and same 


is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies 
falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given chance to the 
permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior to 
those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 


workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness /७।] in chief statement has given the evidence 
that, “The Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.” Although this witness was 
cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness ४७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the 
claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. 
Further, witness ७०७] in his chief statement has stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non- 
messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for administrative exigencies. The Petitioner 
did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 months.” This statement of 
witness १७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness ४७४] on this 
point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria 
of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of ५०४], the claim of the Petitioner 


that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3].3.]997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.]997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 57 Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(]) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 


provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 906[ 


7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.968 and 9..99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of 
panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of 
Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 


regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant 
therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on 
permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen 


to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 


provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 


benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 


continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 


their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman 
failed to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies 
were existing as on 3.3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of 


his seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 


9062 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 


not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness १५०४] in his cross examination 
has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. The Workman 
failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the Respondent in 


appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3[.3.][997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i-e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 


provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 


his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3].3.]997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 


absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 


Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9063 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 


Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 ([) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article /4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


3 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.’ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, 7/./986 in W.A. No.79I of /966 and 25.68. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of /962., The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 


temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities 
must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and 
his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of 


the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 


instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७७४] and ७५७४] 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..l99l were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 


for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, ४७४] states that two different 


9064 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
७४] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 9.6.995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of 
the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ०७४] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 
entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
3.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the 
copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M§8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 
of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 
is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly 
in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as 
per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
MW/I states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, ५०४] 580९5 that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 
of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७४] 
has proved the documents 55.७] to Ex.M2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, /७४। 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as 
to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.997 
and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ७७] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels 
were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized 
after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 
aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 


branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9065 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the 
Workman is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be 


dismissed. 
This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Gowdaperi Lingaiah, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 6.4.86 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 


sans merit, hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the 6" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Gowdaperi Lingaiah MWI: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of caste certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of transfer certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 


Ex.M?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 
dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 


Federation dt.30.7.996 


Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 


9066 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of l989 messenger panel. 
Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M]0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 
Ex.MI2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.lI886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7734.—sitaitre विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 


सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री एस. राजा रतनम के बीच अनुबंध 

में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के  छो४/ (32/2003) 
प्रकाशित करती zs | 

[a= एल-42025/04/2026-आईआर(बी-7)-69] 

सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 734.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 32/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri S. Raja Ratnam. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-D-69] 
SALONTI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the I™ day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 32/2003 
[Old ID No. 249/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 

Between: 
Sri S. Raja Ratnam, 
S/o Daniel, 
R/o Rayapudi, 
Thulluru Mandal, 


Guntur District. ... Petitioner 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9067 


And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3: The Regional Asst. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 
Vijayawada. 
4. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Governorpet branch, 
district. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri S. Raja Ratnam who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 against the Respondents State Bank of 
India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such 
as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court 
may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and 
later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 249/2000, as per orders of Central 
Government vide Lr.No.H-l026/I/200l-IR(C.ID) dated 8.0.200l and registered, numbered in this 
Tribunal as LC No. 32/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along 
with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference 
was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 
7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with 
batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ 


judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award dated 


9068 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases by Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India was 
directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.268/204 and other Writ Appeals 
were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 


as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 


expedited. 
9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 


outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


J 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४४.७.)२०. 268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9069 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 988 to 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 9 years. The Respondent has 
terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from ..997. Further, it is submitted that the 
management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found 
suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 


waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 47..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. B) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 
.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 months 
after .7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The 
Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their 
respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the 
settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon the 
said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding to 
the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. A 
selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was 
to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9 by the said 
letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement 
dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be 
given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against 
the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of 
the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have been 
empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will 


be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7' 
settlement (Ex |), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 3" 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9 is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 
settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex 
M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created 
reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their 
appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with 
the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with 


the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to 


9070 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution 
of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-3/3/|04/67-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, 99], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(l) read 


with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank 
has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies 
of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in 
subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of 
temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour 
practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the 
other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is 
not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 


unfair labour practice. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 907] 


9, The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 


Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 


may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were 


also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 


provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 


question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have 


continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 


9072 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99I. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles [4,86 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. १२०.4।94/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and 
sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for 
carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in 
the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent 
bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlkement which has been reached 
and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 7..87 as 


amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 
with effect from ..997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and violative 


of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter वा of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the 
main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore 
liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own 
any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to brought to the 
notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not adhere to 
the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent 
letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to 
the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the 
Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9073 


dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be 


directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate 
staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions 
imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to 
engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the 
availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the 
branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which represents majority 
of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as its' members 
espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary service in 2 
calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial Disputes Act, 


947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it 
clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 
period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 


9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 


9074 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 


considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with $8९९८.।8(]) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 57 settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 


under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the 
provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 


be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9075 


for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 


accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles [4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 


settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter 
the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.ll886-888 of 998 before the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference 
to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has 
already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any purpose 
what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is covered 
by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. Hence, the 


reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claam Workman has examined himself as WW] and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as ४5.४४] to ७४2. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 


documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.W] to Ex.W3 are the service certificates. Ex.W4 is the caste certificate. Ex.W5 is the study certificate. 
Ex.W6 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W7 is the employment card. Ex.W68 is the interview call letter. Ex.W9 
is the stay order. Ex.W0 is the 992 panel list. Ex.W is the Petitioner’s panel list. Ex.W2 is the legal 


notice to Respondent. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness MWI Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud and this 
witness has exhibited 3 documents, marked as Ex.M]l to MI3. The details of these documents are as 


follows:- 


9076 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M. is the Settlement dated 7.!.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.Mll is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. Ex.MI3 is the employment notification. 


22; Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of 
various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 


appropriate place in this Award. 
23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 


for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 2" settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement 
dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 


also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


IL. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Governorpet branch in terminating the services 


of Workman Sri S. Raja Ratnam, a Messenger with effect from |..997 is justified? 


Il. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 


Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 


appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 
Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 


course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9077 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained 7/5.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 5™ 


settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from ..997. The extract of the said 


letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
..997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from |.l.l997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3.3.997 
as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from ..997 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 
“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from ..997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3. [997 is contained in the 
57 settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both 
the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 
30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of 
India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 
30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 If LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 


9078 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 
26(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(7/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 


Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
447(7) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 


employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a 
competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing the 
date of lapse of both panels on ३].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 


challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 


cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9079 


Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 


entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October /6, 7/94735, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


” 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs. 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 57 Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work 
as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be utilized 
for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The Settlement 
dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under 
Sec.2(p) and Sec.8() of LD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position and it is 
agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.]997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the 
panels on 3].3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy 
of post likely to arise upto 3.3.[997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State 
Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on ..997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, 
the Workman has examined himself as ऐै५] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from 


service by Respondent on ..997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before 


9080 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained 


under section 25 F:- 
Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 


until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 


of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 


specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 
Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 

Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 

Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 


to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 


this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 


reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 
In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 


in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 908] 


conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 


qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 


within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 


9082 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : 000)७ऊहा' 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 


240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 


termination i.e., I..997. 
In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“IT was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection 


before my engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..”’ 
“Tt is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., l..997. 
Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or 
payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked 
with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending 
upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary 
slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on temporary 


basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 


Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force 
in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from 
service by order dated ..997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the 
branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage 
any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. ..!997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman 
does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated 
in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral 
or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of calendar 


year just preceding from date of termination i.e., ..997. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9083 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 
989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office 
not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from ..997, therefore it was directed to 
issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from |..!997. There is no mention in this 


order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do 


not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank 
by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman 
that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.]997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the 
service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal 
that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of working 
days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, 
Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from I..997 and there after. It is settled law 
that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work and as the work 
was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. Therefore, the 
Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot claim any right 
to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory condition of 240 
days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the disengagement of 
Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 25 B of 
the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 


vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


9084 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(l) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..I99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that 
thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, Respondent 
contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the Federation’s 
affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial 
vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies 
may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3[.3.[997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3].3.[997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It 
is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be 
extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3].3.[997 in 
view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As the 
lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 


Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309, therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9085 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6., /9862, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from 7.6. /982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2, /987 to 6.2. /9668, By 
its letter dated 7.2. /98/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /968, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 


and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3].3.[997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and 
finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated 
therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.8() of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that 
life of panels lapsed on ३].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman 
that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has no legal force and same is 


untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls 
upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3].3.]997. The workmen given chance to the 
permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior to 
those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 


workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness फऐैफ] was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in 


the cross examination the witness WWI states:- 


9086 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“ IT used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch. I am not aware of the settlements 
between the federation and the Management. Further witness states, “J am not having any evidence to 


show that any of my juniors are continuing in the service.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is clear that the panel was prepared in 
terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of 
India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. 
Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included 
in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was 
given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has 
been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority 
of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WW]. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has 
given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list [989 and 
992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the 
panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am 
constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order 


of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3].3.]997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8() of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(/) of LD. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9..99 has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of 
panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of 
Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 


regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant 
therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on 
permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen 


to permanent post is as under:- 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9087 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 


provisions contained in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 


benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 


continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 


their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.]997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3.]997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.]997., However, the workman failed 
to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were 
existing as on 3].3.]997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his 
seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also not 


acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness ४४५४] in his cross examination 
has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. The Workman 
failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the Respondent in 


appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


9088 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 


provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles ॥4 and /6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 


his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3].3.]997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 


absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 


Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 


Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article l4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 


This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9089 


this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


d 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.’ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the oe respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, 77. /966 in W.A. ४०. 797 of 7966 and 25.6. /96/7 in 
W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 


temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities 
must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and 
his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the 


I 


state.’ 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 


instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and ७५७। 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988, 9..l99] were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 
for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, MW states that two different 
panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
४] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 9.6.995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the 
said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ४७४] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 


9090 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 4995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. ४७४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
3.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on ..997. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the 
copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M§8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 
of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 
is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per 
seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
४७] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, MWI states that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 
of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness /४४। 
has proved the documents Ex.M] to Ex.M2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४७। 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as 
to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.997 
and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ७७] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels 
were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized 
after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 
aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 


branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 
This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, वा and III, the Workman 


is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 909] 


AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri S. Raja Ratnam, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. ..997 is justified. Hence, 
the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, 


hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the l!" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri S. Raja Ratnam १४४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


>>. ४७४] to 

Ex.W3: Photocopies of service certificates 

Ex.W4: Photocopy of caste certificate 

Ex.W5S: Photocopy of study certificate 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of transfer certificate 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of employment card 

Ex.W8: Photocopy of interview call letter 

Ex.W9: Photocopy of stay order 

Ex.W0: Photocopy of 992 panel list 

०) जी है Photocopy of Petitioner’s panel list 

5.४४ 2: Photocopy of legal notice to Respondent. 

Documents marked for the Respondent 

Ex.MI: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 

Ex.M2?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 


dt.9.6.995 


9092 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.MI0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MI: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

Ex.M]2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 

Ex.M]3: Photocopy of employment notification. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7735.—sitattia विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री के. विजय बाबू के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औघोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघधोगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के i PR/ (33/2003) 
प्रकाशित करती है। 


[a= एल-42025/04/2026-आईआर(बी-)-70] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 735.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 33/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri K. Vijaya Babu. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-70] 
SALONT, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the l™ day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No._ 33/2003 
[Old ID No. 24/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri K. Vijaya Babu, 
S/o O. Joseph, 
R/o D.No.2-3-9/2, 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9093 


Prakash Nagar, 


Narasaraopet Town, 


Guntur district. .... Petitioner 
And 
l. The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 


Central office, 

Mumbai. 
2; The Chief General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad. 
3. The Regional Asst. General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 

Vijayawada. 
4. The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Narasaraopet branch(ADB), 

Guntur district. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri S. Adinarayana, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri K. Vijaya Babu who worked as Driver cum Messenger (who will be referred to as the 
workman) has filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the 
Respondents State Bank of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Driver cum Messenger duly 
granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant 
benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute 
before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal 
bearing ID No. 24/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr. No. H- 026/I/200l-IR(C.ID 
dated 8.0.200I and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 33/2003. 


23 Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 


bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute 


9094 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


along with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the 
reference was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award 
dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along 
with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court 
vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.20I4 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award 
dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200l and other batch of ID cases by Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India 
was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 20I4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ 
Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is 
extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 


expedited. 
9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 


outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.” 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9095 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४४.७.)२०.।268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3: The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 5.5.986 to 
20.3.997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about l] years. The 
Respondent has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from March, 997. Further, it 
is submitted that the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed 
personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait-listing them by offering permanent 


appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 7..I987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. 8) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months 
after .7.l975. C) 0) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 
months after .7.975. 


3. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. 
The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of 
their respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of 
the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon 
the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding 
to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. 
A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel 
was to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the 
said letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second 
agreement dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was 
to be given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were 
against the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the 
enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have 
been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, 


“will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 
[7 settlement (Ex MI), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 274 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 
is the 3” settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9] is 4" settlement and settlement dated 
30.7.96 is 5" settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 


marked as Ex M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements 


9096 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a 
question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his 
services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless 
to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet 
of Article 2] of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-३3/३/|04/67-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of AP .. 
by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble 
High Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. 
In view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select 
panels prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7..87 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 99, and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made 
alive upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.]997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read 


with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the 
bank has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to 
exigencies of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary 
employees in subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the 
nature of temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken 
by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair 
labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on 
the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees 


is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9097 


would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 


unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 


Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector 


banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after . 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were also 


considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 


provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 


question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. __ It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 


several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 


9098 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It 
is submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would 
have continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99I. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles [4,86 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


II. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties 
and sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed 
for carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled 
in the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the 
Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has 
been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 


7..87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the 
candidates with effect from March, 4997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own 
guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 


Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, 
the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and 
therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 
does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to 
brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did 
not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the 
year 995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management 
has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance 
to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 


997, subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9099 


candidates are litigating, the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated 
that the panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to 
engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed 
permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the 
services of the Workman by oral order dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural 
justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all 


incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate 
staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions 
imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to 
engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the 
availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the 
branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which represents majority 
of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as its' members 
espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary service in 2 
calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial Disputes Act, 


947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear 
that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach 
paper specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit 
of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, |947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 
2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired 
they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines 
envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more 
days, the bank by way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had 


put in less than 90 days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 


900 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


975 were also considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 
provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the 
approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and 
disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another 
settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended 
upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed 
that while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of 


casual/daily wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 4997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (p) read with Sec.8(/) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 57 settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 


under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of 
the provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 


settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9I0I 


settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 


accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 


settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. 
Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.l886-888 of 998 before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, 
reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the 
same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any 
purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is 
covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. 


Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claam Workman has examined himself as ऐैफ] and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to WI6. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 


documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


902 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.Wl_ to Ex.W7 are the service certificates. Ex.W8 is the marks memo. Ex.W9 is the transfer certificate. 
Ex.W0 is the caste certificate. Ex.WI] is the driving certificate. Ex.WI2 is the employment card. 
Ex.W]3 is the interview call letter. Ex.W4 is the stay order. Ex.W5 is the 992 panel list. +5.४४]6 is 


the legal notice. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness MWI Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud and this 
witness has exhibited 2 documents, marked as 55.५] to MI2. The details of these documents are as 


follows:- 


Ex.M.I is the Settlement dated 7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99]. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.!996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.MI] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. Ex.M2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list 
of various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 


appropriate place in this Award. 
23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 


for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


L Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement 
dated 27.0.988, A" settlement dated 9..99] and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 


also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


IL. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Narasaraopet ADB branch in terminating the 
services of Workman Sri K. Vijaya Babu, a Messenger with effect from March, 997 is 
justified? 

Il. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 


Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 
IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (I) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 


written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 903 


conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by _ the 


appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 
Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 


course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 


5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from March, 997. The extract of the said 


letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of !989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
March, 997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from March, 997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 
३3].3.]997 as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent 
letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank 
of India not to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from March, 997 and 
it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers 
maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been 
issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this 
effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by 
the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from March, 4997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary 
workers and daily wagers by 3.3.!997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is 


contained in the 5" settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the 


904 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


consensus of both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained 
in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.]997 as agreed between State Bank of India 
and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 the said 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 II LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /9866 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February /9867 under Section 
2565(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section 67), 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 


Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
447(/) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 


employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before 
a competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing 
the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.[997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 


challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 4977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 


Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]05 


Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 


entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 76, /9735, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has 
work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be 
utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(/) of ID. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel 
list is allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both 
the panels on 3.3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of 
vacancy of post likely to arise upto 3].3,[997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management 


of State Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


906 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on March, 997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation 
in lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, !947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this 
context, the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been 
terminated from service by Respondent on March, 997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the 


provision contained under section 25 F:- 
Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 


until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 


of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 


specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 
Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 

Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 

Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 


to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 


(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 907 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 


this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 


reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 
In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has _ laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 


qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


#॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd case, held as under: 


908 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7/964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 


240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 


termination i.e., March, 997. 
In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection 


before my engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 
“I did not work continuously for 240 days in any branch in any year.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent 
bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had 
worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 
March, 997. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing 
notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of 
days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily 
wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment 
letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch 


on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 


Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 909 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the 
force in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated 
from service by order dated March, 997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the 
work in the branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority 
not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. March, 997. Thus, such 
disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his 
claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to 
establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a 


twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., March, 997. 


32) Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees 
of 989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central 
office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from March, 997, therefore it was 
directed to issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from March, 997. There is no 


mention in this order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is 
directed to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these 


circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated ३].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent 
bank by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.[997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 
from the service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes 
to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of 
working days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, 
therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from March, 997 and there after. 
It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work 
and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. 
Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot 
claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under 
Sec.25F and 25 B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 


Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 


90 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 


vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(l) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.I988, 27.0.988 and 9.!.!99I were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and 
that thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, 
Respondent contended that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time 
non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3].3.[997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3. [997, ie., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3.3.997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9lil 


It is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot 
be extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3].3.]997 
in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As 
the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 


Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /982, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from /.6./982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /987 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /968, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 


and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. | The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion 
and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions 
enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(l) of the ID. Act, 947, I am of the 
considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and 
plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has no legal 


force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies 
falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 


Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 


92 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.]997. The workmen given chance to 
the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior 
to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to 


other workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness फऐैफ] was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in 


the cross examination the witness WWI states:- 


“T filed the panel list.” Further, the witness states, “Prior to my oral appointment there was no 
notification. I used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch.” ..... Further witness 


states, “Jam not having any evidence to show that any of my juniors are continuing in the service.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is clear that the panel was prepared in 
terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank 
of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. 
Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and 
he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the 
Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular 
appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and 
violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of १४७], Thus, there is no evidence on 
record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the 
panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the 
seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the 
workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before 
it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(]) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(]) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse 
of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim 
of Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 


regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 93 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is 
relevant therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the 
Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization 


of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 


provisions contained in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 


benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 


continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 


their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.]997. However, the workman 
failed to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies 
were existing as on 3.3, [997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of 
his seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 


not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 


94 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness ऐै७] in his cross 
examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. 
The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the 


Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 


provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and ॥6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 


his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 


absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 


Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 


Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 95 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article /4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the ae respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, //. /986 in W.A. १४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.6. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of 79682, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 
temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the 
authorities must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the 
rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation 


I 


policy of the state.’ 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 


instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७] and 
१॥५७] in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] 
were entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 
994 for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two 
different panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. 
There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and 
Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent 


absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 


9]6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


9.6.995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was 
decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWl6= states that on 
30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for 
filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage 
/casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from 
January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. ४७४] states that it was also agreed that 
all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before ३].3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that 
all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on March, 997. Ex.M6 is the copy 
of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3].3.]997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is 
the copy of the statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the 
statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness 
states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted 
and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time 
between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by 
them in the bank in the given period. Further, शिफ] states petitioner was not sponsored by any 
employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for appointment as a 
regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the 
bank. Further, ७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary 
employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७४] has proved the documents 75.४] to 
Ex.M]2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, MWI was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the 
witness 0५७४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on ३].3.]997 and reasons assigned for non- 
absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness ७४७] was re- 
examined by the Respondent and the witness ७] states that panels were expired in terms of the 
settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no termination 
of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank 
as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the 0७४] in 
re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman 
that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis 


of panel list is found not established. 
This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the 
Workman is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be 


dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 97 


AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri K. Vijaya Babu, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. March, 997 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 


sans merit, hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the !" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri K. Vijaya Babu MWI: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


>>. ४४] to 

Ex.W7: Photocopies of service certificates 
Ex.W8: Photocopy of marks memo 
Ex.W9: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W0: Photocopy of caste certificate 
+5.४४] |: Photocopy of driving certificate 
+5.४४2: Photocopy of employment card 
75.४४ ३: Photocopy of interview call letter 
+5.४४4: Photocopy of stay order 

+ह.४४]5: Photocopy of 992 panel list 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of legal notice 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 


Ex.M2?: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 


Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 


Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 


Ex.M5: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 
dt.9.6.995 


98 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of l989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.MI0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

+5.| |: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

Ex.M]2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.lI886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 736.--औघोगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री ज्योति रोसियह के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औघोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के ॥ PR (34/2003) 
प्रकाशित करती है। 


[a= Tel-72025/04/2026-3Ty3ie(AT-I)-7] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 736.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 34/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri Jyothi Rosiah. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-D-77] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the " day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 34/2003 
[Old ID No. 283/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri Jyothi Rosiah, 
S/o Papaiah, 
Velamuripadu post, 


Addanki Mandal, 


Prakasam distt. ..... Petitioner 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 99 


And 
l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India (ADB), 
Addanki branch. 
4. The Regional Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal Office, 
Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri S. Prasada Rao, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Jyothi Rosiah who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as 
continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court 
may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and 
later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 283/99, as per orders of Central 
Government vide Lr.No.H-l026/I/200l-IR(C.ID) dated 8.0.200l and registered, numbered in this 
Tribunal as LC No. 34/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along 
with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference 
was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 
7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with 
batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ 


judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award dated 


920 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases by Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India was 
directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.268/204 and other Writ Appeals 
were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 


as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 


expedited. 
9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 


outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


3 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४७४.७.)२०.।2668 of 20I4 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]2[ 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from ..87 to 
3.7.98, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 6 years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 3.7.98. Further, it is submitted that 
the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found 
suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 


waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 47..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in l2 months or less 
after |.7.975. 8) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 
.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 months 
after .7.975. 


3: The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The 
Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their 
respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99l. Clause 0 of the 
settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon the 
said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding to 
the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. A 
selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was 
to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9 by the said 
letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement 
dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be 
given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against 
the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of 
the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have been 
empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will 


be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7' 
settlement (Ex Ml), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9] is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 
settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex 
M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created 
reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their 
appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working 
with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized 


with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing 


922 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2 of the 


Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-3/3/|04/67-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, 99], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read 


with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank 
has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies 
of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in 
subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of 
temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour 
practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the 
other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is 
not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 


unfair labour practice. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 923 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 


Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 


may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were 


also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 


provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 


question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It 
is submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would 


have continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 


924 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.4l94/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99I. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles [4,86 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and 
sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for 
carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in 
the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent 
bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached 
and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 7..87 as 


amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 
with effect from ३].7.98 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and violative 


of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-II of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.[997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter वा of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, 
the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore 
liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own 
any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to brought to the 
notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not adhere to 
the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its’ instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent 
letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to 
the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the 
Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 925 


dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be 


directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub- 
ordinate staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the 
restrictions imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent 
bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., 
depending on the availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted 
functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which 
represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as 
its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary 
service in l2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 


Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made 
it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 
period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 


9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 


926 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 


considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (p) read with Sec.l8() of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 57 settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 


under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of 
the provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.[997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 


be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 927 


for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 


accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 


settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. 
Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.l886-888 of 998 before the 
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, 
reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the 
same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any 
purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is 
covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. 


Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW] and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W5. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 


documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the interview call letter. Ex.W2 is the service certificate. Ex.W3 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W4 


is the community, nativity and birth certificate. Ex.W5 is the service certificate. 


420 8 On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७] Sri IS. Appa Rao and this witness has 


exhibited [2 documents, marked as 55.७] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.l is the Settlement dated !7..987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 


928 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.MI] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. !886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. Ex.M]3 is the paper notification. 


22, Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of 
various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 


appropriate place in this Award. 
23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 


for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement 
dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 


also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


II. Whether the action of State Bank of India, main branch, Addanki in terminating the 


services of Workman Sri Jyothi Rosiah, a Messenger with effect from 3.7.98 is justified? 


Il. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 


Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 


appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 
Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 


course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 


panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 929 


to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 5" 


settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from 3.7.98. The extract of the said letter 


is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
3.7.98.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.[997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from 3.7.98 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as 
per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from 3].7.96 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 
“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from ३3].7.98 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and 
daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" 
settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the 
parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 
30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of 
India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8(]) of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 
30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 If LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 
265(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/),. 


930 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(7/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /8(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 


Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
447(/) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 


employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a 
competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing the 
date of lapse of both panels on ३].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 


challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 


entitled to due weight and consideration. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]3| 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October /6, /9735, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


” 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs. 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work 
as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be utilized 
for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The Settlement 
dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under 
Sec.2(p) and Sec.8() of LL.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position and it is 
agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.]997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the 
panels on 3].3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy 
of post likely to arise upto 3.3.[997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State 


Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 (I) of I.D. Act, 947. 
Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on 3.7.98 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, 
the Workman has examined himself as ऐै५] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from 
service by Respondent on 3.7.98 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before 
examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained 


under section 25 F:- 


932 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 


until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 


of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 


to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 


this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 


reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 
In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 


days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]33 


particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board ०. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 


qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


934 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 


240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 


termination i.e., 3.7.98. 
In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection 


before my engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 
“Tt is true that I did not work for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank in any branch.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WW that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.7.98. 
Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or 
payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked 
with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending 
upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary 
slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on 


temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 


Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force 
in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from 
service by order dated ३].7.98 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the 
branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage 
any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.7.98. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does 
not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in 
contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or 
documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year 


just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.7.98. 


32: Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 
989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 935 


not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from ३].7.98, therefore it was directed to 
issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from 3.7.98. There is no mention in this 


order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do 


not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.[997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank 
by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman 
that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.]997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the 
service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal 
that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of working 
days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, 
Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from 3].7.98 and there after. It is settled law 
that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work and as the work 
was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. Therefore, the 
Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot claim any right 
to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory condition of 240 
days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the disengagement of 
Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 25 B of 
the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 


vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 


and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 


936 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.I99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that 
thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, 
Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time 
non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3[.3. 997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3.3.997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It 
is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be 
extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in 
view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As the 
lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 


Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court 
have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 


issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 937 


old practice from 7.6./982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /987 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /986, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 


and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and 
finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated 
therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(l) of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that 
life of panels lapsed on 3].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman 
that the panel shall continue even after 3].3.]997 till last man absorbed has no legal force and 


same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies 
falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given chance to the 
permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior to 
those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 


workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness फफ] was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in 


the cross examination the witness WWI states:- 


I 


“Prior to my oral appointment in /967 there was no notification.’ 


... TI used to work depending upon availability of work in the branch. I am not aware of the settlements 
between the federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “Tt is true that I am not having any 


documents to show that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


938 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the panel was prepared in 
terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of 
India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. 
Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included 
in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was 
given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has 
been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority 
of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has 
given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 
992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the 
panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am 
constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order 


of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8() of ID. Act, l947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of 
panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of 
Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 


regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant 
therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on 
permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen 


to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 


provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 


Status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 939 


labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 


benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 


continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 


their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.]997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997. However, the workman 
failed to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies 
were existing as on 3.3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of 
his seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 


not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness ४४५७] in his cross examination 
has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. The Workman 
failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the Respondent in 


appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3[.3.][997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels Le., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3].3.]997. This 


940 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 


provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and ॥6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 


his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 


absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 


Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 


Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 ([) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article l4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


I 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.’ 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]4[ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 27 respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, 77, /9866 in W.A. ॥४०. 7297 of 7966 and 25.6. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 


temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities 
must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and 
his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of 


the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 


instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and ५७४] 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988, 9.I.99] were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 
for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, ७] states that two different 
panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
४] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. ०७] states that on 9.6.995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of 
the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ०७४] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 
entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
३3].3.[997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on 3.7.98. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the 
copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M§8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 
of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 


942 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly 
in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as 
per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 
of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७४] 
has proved the documents 5.७] to Ex.M2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४४७। 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as 
to discredit the testimony of the witness ४७४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.997 
and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ७७] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels 
were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized 
after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 
aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 


branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 
This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, IJ and II, the Workman 


is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 
This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Jyothi Rosiah, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.7.98 is justified. Hence, 
the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, 


hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the " day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 


WWI: Sri Jyothi Rosiah MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 943 


Ex.WI: 
Ex.W2: 
Ex.W3: 
Ex.W4: 


Ex.WS: 


Ex.MI: 


Ex.M?2: 


Ex.M3: 


Ex.M4: 


Ex.MS: 


Ex.M6: 


Ex.M7: 
Ex.M8: 
Ex.M9: 
Ex.M0: 


Ex.MII: 


Ex.MI2: 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Photocopy of interview call letter 
Photocopy of service certificate 
Photocopy of the transfer certificate 
Photocopy of community, nativity and birth certificate 
Photocopy of Service certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 


Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 
dt.9.6.995 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.30.7.996 


Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 
Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 


Photocopy of order in SLP No.I886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7737.—sitaitia विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री माहिराला अन्जाइअह के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औघोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के i ph 
(39/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[a= एल-42025/04/2026-आईआर(बी-)-73] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


944 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 737.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 39/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri Maddirala Anjaiah. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-D-73] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6™ day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 39/2003 
[Old ID No. 269/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 
Sri Maddirala Anjaiah, 
S/o Samalu, 
Takkellapadu, 
Naguluppalpadu mandal, 
Prakasam distt. 
... Petitioner 

And 
l. The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 

Central office, 

Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad. 
3: The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, A.D.B., 

Addanki branch. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 945 


4. The Regional Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal office, 

Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : M/s. S. Prasada Rao, Advocates 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri Maddirala Anjaiah who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits 
such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this 
court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for 
adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 269/99, as per orders 
of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026//200l-IR(C.ID) dated 8.0.200I and registered, numbered in 
this Tribunal as LC No. 39/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along 
with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference 
was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 
7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with 
batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ 
judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award dated 
7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases by Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India was 
directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 
termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.268/204 and other Writ Appeals 
were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 


as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 


Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 


946 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 


expedited. 
9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 


outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


I 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४४.७.)२०.। 268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3: The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from .5.84 to 
3.7.98 and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 4 years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 3].7.98. Further, it is submitted that 
the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found 
suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 


waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 7..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 
categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. B) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 
.7.975. C) (0) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 months 
after .7.975. 


3. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 


candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 947 


Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their 
respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99I. Clause 0 of the 
settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon the 
said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding to 
the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. A 
selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was 
to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9 by the said 
letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement 
dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be 
given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against 
the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of 
the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have been 
empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will 


be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7' 
settlement (Ex |), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2" settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 34 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9 is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 
settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex 
M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created 
reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their 
appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with 
the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with 
the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to 
whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2] of the Constitution 
of India. 


de Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-३3/3३/ 04/87-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto 
December, 99], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 


948 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(]) read 


with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank 
has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies 
of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in 
subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of 
temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour 
practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the 
other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is 
not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 


unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 


Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 


may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in [2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 


banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 949 


employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were 


also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 


provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 


question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect-that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees 
will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management 
herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 
9..99] will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are 
working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the termination of the 
employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged several new persons 
as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble High Court without 
considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is submitted inspite 
of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued the 
similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases 
for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this 
Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central 
Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99l. Hence, the 
impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles 
4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


II. The Workman submits that in W.P. १२०.4।94/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and 
sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for 
carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in 
the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent 
bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached 
and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 7..87 as 


amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2, Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 


absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 


950 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


with effect from 3.3.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and 


violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the 
main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore 
liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own 
any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to brought to the 
notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not adhere to 
the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent 
letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to 
the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the 
Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 
Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order 
dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be 


directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate 
staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions 
imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to 
engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the 
availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the 
branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which represents majority 
of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as its' members 
espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary service in 2 
calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial Disputes Act, 


947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 


temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9I5] 


appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it 
clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 
period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 
9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 
was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 


considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 4997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (9) read with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 5" settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 


federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 


952 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 


under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the 
provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 
employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 


accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 


permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 953 


Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 


settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter 
the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.ll886-888 of 998 before the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference 
to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has 
already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any purpose 
what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is covered 
by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. Hence, the 


reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as ४5.४४] to W7. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 


documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W3 is the caste certificate. Ex.W4 is 
the call letter. Ex.W5 is the service certificate. Ex.W6 is the conduct certificate. Ex.W7 is the nativity 


certificate. 


2. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness MW] Sri I.s. Appa Rao and this witness has 


exhibited 2 documents, marked as 55.७] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M. is the Settlement dated 7.l.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.Ml] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 
dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of 
various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 
appropriate place in this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 


for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement 
dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99I and 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 


also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


954 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Addanki ADB branch, in terminating the 
services of Workman Sri Maddirala Anjaiah, a Messenger with effect from 3].7.98 is 
justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 


Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 


appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 
Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 


course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 5" 


settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3,.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from 3.3.997. The extract of the said 


letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
3.3.997.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]55 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from 3].3.[997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3.3.997 
as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from ३].3.]997 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 
“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3.3.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3].3. [997 is contained in the 
57 settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both 
the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 
30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of 
India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 
30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 II LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under 3८८7० /6(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 


incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February 79687 under Section 
2_6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(7/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 


Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 
447(7) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 4/(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, 7966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 


employment, is legal or not.” 


956 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a 
competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing the 
date of lapse of both panels on ३].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 


challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 


entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 
bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 76, 7/9735, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


d 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.’ 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 957 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 57 Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work 
as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be utilized 
for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The Settlement 
dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under 
Sec.2(p) and Sec.8() of LL.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position and it is 
agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the 
panels on ३].3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy 
of post likely to arise upto 3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State 


Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 
Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on 3.7.98 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, 
the Workman has examined himself as ऐैफ] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from 
service by Respondent on 3.7.98 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before 
examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained 


under section 25 F:- 
Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 


until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 


of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 


specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 


958 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


()4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 
to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 


this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 


reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 
In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (6) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph II as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 


provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]59 


that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 72 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 


qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 


Enamel and Stamping Works (P) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 


240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


In this context, ४४७७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“ My service was for total no. of /96 days spread with gaps from time to time for the period from /964 to 
4966 which is Ex.W5..... 


I was not sponsored by employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days 


in a year continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


960 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. 
Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or 
payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked 
with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending 
upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary 
slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on 


temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 


Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force 
in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from 
service by order dated ३].7.98 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the 
branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage 
any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman 
does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated 
in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral 
or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of calendar 


year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.]997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 
989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office 
not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.997, therefore it was directed to 
issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from 3.3.997. There is no mention in this 


order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do 


not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.[997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank 
by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman 
that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.]997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the 


service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9I6l 


that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of working 
days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, 
Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from 3.3.997 and there after. It is settled 
law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work and as the 
work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. Therefore, 
the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot claim any 
right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory condition of 
240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the disengagement 
of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 25 B 
of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 


vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7.I.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that 


thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 


962 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 
was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, Respondent 
contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the Federation’s 
affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial 
vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies 
may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3].3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3].3.]997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It 
is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be 
extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3].3.[997 in 
view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As the 
lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 


Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court 
have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from /.6./982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /98/7 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2. /98/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /986, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 


and the appeal respectively.” 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 963 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3.3.997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and 
finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated 
therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that 
life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman 
that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.[997 till last man absorbed has no legal force and same 


is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls 
upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given chance to the 
permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior to 
those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 


workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ७।] in chief statement has given the evidence 
that, “The Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.” Although this witness was 
cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness ४४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the 
claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. 
Further, witness ०७] in his chief statement has stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non- 
messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for administrative exigencies. The Petitioner 
did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 months.” This statement of 
witness १०७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness ४७७४] on this 
point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria 
of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of ५०४], the claim of the Petitioner 


that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3].3.]997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.]997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 


964 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(/) of ID. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99 has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 
No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of 
panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of 
Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 


regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant 
therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on 
permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen 


to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 


provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 


benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 


continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 


their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.]997 has been filled up 


from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]65 


Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3.[997., However, the workman failed 
to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were 
existing as on 3].3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his 
seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also 


not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness १५०४] in his cross examination 
has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. The Workman 
failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the Respondent in 


appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 
3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 


provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 


his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 


absent of such rule/scheme. 


966 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 


Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 


Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 ([) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article l4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 26, 7/./986 in W.A. No.79I of /966 and 25.6. /967 in 
W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 


temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities 
must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and 
his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy 
of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 


instant case of Workman. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 967 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and ७५७। 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988, 9..l99] were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 
for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, MW states that two different 
panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
४] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI states that on 9.6.995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the 
said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ७] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 
entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. MW] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
३3].3.]997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the 
copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M§8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 
of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 
is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per 
seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
MW/I states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, ०७७] states that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 
of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७४। 
has proved the documents Ex.M] to Ex.M]2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४७। 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as 
to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.997 
and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ७४७७४] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels 
were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized 
after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 


aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 


968 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 
branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 

This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, वा and III, the Workman 


is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 
This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Maddirala Anjaiah, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.7.98 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 


sans merit, hence, dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the 6" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Maddirala Anjaiah ४७४]: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of caste certificate 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of call letter 
Ex.W5S: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of conduct certificate 
Ex.W7: Photocopy of nativity certificate 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 
Ex.M?2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 
Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 
Ex.Mé4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 
Ex.M5: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 


dt.9.6.995 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]69 


Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.MI0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+5./॥2: Photocopy of order in SLP ]२०.686-]868 of 998 dated 0.6.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7738.—sitaitr विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय 
सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री येदलूरी मुसलइअह के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघ्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के I pR/ 
(40/2003) प्रकाशित करती है | 


[a= एल-42025/04/2026-आईआर(बी-)-74] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 738.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 40/2003) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
management of State Bank of India and their workman Sri Yedluri Musaliah. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-74] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6™ day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 40/2003 
[Old ID No. 284/99 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 


Sri Yedluri Musaliah, 
S/o Mattaiah, 

Pokuru branch, 
Prakasam distt. 


... Petitioner 


970 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Pokuru branch. 
4. The Regional Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal office, 
Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri K. Rathanga Pani Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Yedluri Musaliah who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of 
India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such 
as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court 
may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and 
later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 284/99, as per orders of Central 
Government vide Lr.No.H-026/I/200l-IR(C.II) dated 8.0.200l and registered, numbered in this 
Tribunal as LC No. 40/2003. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a 
bird eye view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along 
with the batch cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference 
was answered in favour of the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 
7.5.2005 was challenged by the aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with 
batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ 
judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ petitions and set aside the common award dated 
7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases by Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State Bank of India was 
directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to their 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]7] 


termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive 
vacancy arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP 
No.6470/204 and batch petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High 
Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 204. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.268/204 and other Writ Appeals 
were decided by Division Bench of High Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 
20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal was pleased to pass the order which is extracted 
as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting 
unofficial Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award 
af the Tribunal, the proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for 
reasons more than one. Firstly, in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different 
persons have different claims as to the length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of 
engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues 
will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case ought to have been directed to be decided by the 
Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important aspect is the learned single Judge has 
in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that could have been granted 
without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have been decided by 
the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, which 
has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain 
the order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the 
further findings and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases 
have to be sent back for consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will 
have to be carried forward with the materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to 
the persons, who have claims as well as the management to place their rival contentions and further 
material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing for the workmen are justified in pointing out 
that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the Tribunal in this line may be 
expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(/) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the 
common award dated /7,05.2005 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an 
outer limit of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


है 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४४.७.)२०.। 268 of 204 
and batch cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it 
afresh in view of the aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal 
No.268/204 vide judgement dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement 
are that, the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from .7.75 to 
३].7.98 and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 22 years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 3].7.98. Further, it is submitted that 
the management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found 
suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or 
waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on 7..987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation and the Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three 


972 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


categories of employees were listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less 
after .7.975. B) those who have completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after 
.7.975. C) (0) those who have completed minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any 
calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate temporary service in continuous block of 36 months 
after .7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection 
committee and the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for 
permanent appointment. Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the 
candidates satisfying the qualifications the suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The 
Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their 
respective categorization and the selected panel would be valid upto December, 99I. Clause 0 of the 
settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no temporary appointments in the 
subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from amongst empanelled 
candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that consequent upon the 
said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for responding to 
the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, 989 was held. A 
selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was 
to be valid upto December, 99, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9 by the said 
letter it is mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement 
dated 6.7.88 was entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be 
given, “to all eligible temporary employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against 
the vacancies likely to arise during the years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of 
the problem an extension of the currency of the panel, eligible temporary employees who have been 
empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will 
be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7' 
settlement (Ex |), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 27 settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 3" 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9 is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 
settlement (Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex 
M5. That due to all these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created 
reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their 
appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with 
the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with 
the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to 
whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2l of the Constitution 
of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. 7-३3/3३/|04/87-२, 
dated 6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the 
Management herein were specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is 
fully resolved, no bank is permitted to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons 
similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by the inaction on the part of the management of the bank 
is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel and not clearly focusing the vacancy 
position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is specifically averred in the said 
writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement and that it violates the 
various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High court of A.P .. by 
order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It also 
directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, 997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In 
view of the directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels 
prepared on the basis of the agreement entered into on 7.l.87 under which the panel was valid upto 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]73 


December, 499], and on the basis of a settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive 
upto 3.3.!997 under which the panel was valid upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 
6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 
whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.]997 were under the bonafide impression that their cases 
will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable expectation. 
Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the settlements 
entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees 
those who are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. 
Aggrieved by the said action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ 
petition before the Hon'ble High Court and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that 
the proceedings issued by the Deputy General Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 
3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen 
therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as violative of Section 2(p) and 8(]) read 
with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank 
has submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies 
of circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in 
subordinate cadre. It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of 
temporary employees that it had engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the 
bank either on the ground of urgent need or of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour 
practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the 
other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend under various statutes to its employees is 
not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit would show that the bank 
would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is a facet of 
unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 
7..87, 6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of 
Government dated 6.8.90 stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with 
regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines 
were issued to implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. The Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks 
may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 
240 days of temporary service in [2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F 
may be decided by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary 
employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 consecutive months or less, a settlement 
could be avoided and however if the Management so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement 
with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put 
in temporary service of 90 or more days after .] 982 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. 
Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect of employees who had put in 
temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered into settlements Even 
in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the settlements are more 
beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) that the 
banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after ..982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the 
scheme. The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were 
also considered. 


974 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to 
provide permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be 
one time exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of 
temporary workmen covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines 
would cover only those persons who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not 
otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the Respondents have not only followed the Government of India 
guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, 
question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein 
there is a clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage 
employees will be operated to a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The 
Management herein relying upon this settlement in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the 
settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management to terminate the services of the temporary 
employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein as it does not specify the 
termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management has engaged 
several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of Hon’ble 
High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have 
continued the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and 
consider their cases for absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the 
directions of this Hon'ble Court in Writ Petition No.4!94/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued 
by the Central Government, the Management should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..99I. 
Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as 
Articles 4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where 
in they have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and 
sought for absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for 
carrying out the terms of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in 
the list, they were not regularized and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent 
bank and its officers cannot escape from the liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached 
and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall implement the settlement dated 7..87 as 
amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


(.2: Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the 
workmen to be absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the 
date of settlement even the authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only 
from among the empanelled can be appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except 
from among the empanelled candidates like the Workman and that should be continued till they are 
absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices and terminated the services of the candidates 
with effect from 3.3.!997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to their own guidelines and 
violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal 
and unfair labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the 
Workman after 3.3.97 who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not 
have been done without any notice and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the 
said action is violative of principles of natural justice guaranteed under Chapter वा of the Constitution of 
India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]75 


main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore 
liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own 
any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not published anywhere to brought to the 
notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that Management did not adhere to 
the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 in the year 995. The 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the 
procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent Management sent 
letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, subsequent to 
the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, the 
Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates 
like the Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 
Hence, the action of the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order 
dated 3.3.97 is unjust, illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be 
directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable 
and contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate 
staff constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions 
imposed by the Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to 
engage sub-ordinate staff like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the 
availability of work on purely temporary basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the 
branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which represents majority 
of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of the work force as its' members 
espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of temporary service in 2 
calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7..987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8() of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 
58 of Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated 7..87 which may be 
herein after referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned 
in the claim statement above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the 
temporary employees as categorized would be given a chance for being considered for permanent 
appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 
99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the Federation and the Bank whereby it was 
agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 in place of 987 to 99] as 
contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. A 3™ settlement 
was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to arise 
from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued 
guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees 
in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the 
issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that 
all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper 
specified that the cases of temporary service in [2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of 
Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 may be decided by entering into a settlement with the 
representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 240 days of service in 2 
consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management so desired they 
could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it is mentioned that 
only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after ..82 
would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 


976 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by 
way of a further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 
days and also the bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also 
considered. Hence, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as 
possible jobs subject to the availability of the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it 
clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past 
period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the settlement. Another settlement was entered on 
9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was extended upto 994 and separate panel 
was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that while vacancies arising 
between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily wagers, they can be 
considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four 
Zonal Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts 
of Andhra Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down 
therein prepared the panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also 
panel of casual/daily wagers denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent 
absorption. These panels were prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the 
descending order of temporary service put in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 
3.7.988. That the Federation approached the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of 
bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary employees. The Regional Labour 
Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was arrived between the 
Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 4997. A copy of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was 
arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 
under Sec.2 (p) read with 8९८.।8(]) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter 
called as 5" settlement. That on 27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the 
federation’s affiliate and the bank Management recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the 
messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by Central Office and thereby 403 
messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual 
manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the Federation's affiliate and 
the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary 
employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 
days in a continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a 
direction to consider his candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except 
under the settlement entered into thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five 
settlements having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions 
and terms of the settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the 
provisions of the terms of the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in 
compliance of the terms agreed under these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they 
ceased to exist on 3.3.997. That the bank has never promised that all the candidates in the panel will be 
absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that candidates will be considered for absorption in 
the vacancies that may arise upto 992. Keeping alive the panels after 3.3.997 is contrary to the 
settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management bank. That the 
settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said settlement. 
The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against 
the vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]77 


employees to be absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to 
be considered for employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand 
for reinstatement has to be decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired 
on 3].3.97 and it is an integral term of the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the 
law. These temporary employees who unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies 
have no further rights to be considered for regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP 
No.2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the settlement arrived at between the All India 
State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the bank Management is binding on 
the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of the settlement has been 
violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time basis before 
3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition 
is therefore misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which 
flows from the settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is 
not the grievance of the Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the 
Workman has been denied by the bank Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone 
substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is 
accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and 
allowed to be continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly 
permanent through back door entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to 
Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come 
through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights have been crystallized by operation of the 
settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High 
Court of A.P. and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA 
No.86/98 and the batch was filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter 
the ex-temporary employees filed Special Leave Petition No.ll886-!888 of 998 before the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference 
to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has 
already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements cannot be relied upon for any purpose 
what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. Further the issue is covered 
by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High Courts. Hence, the 
reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as फेक] and also filed documents in 
evidence which has been exhibited as Ex.WIl to W4. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of 
documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


जज. १७] is the study record sheet. Ex.W2 is the service certificate. Ex.W3 is the service certificate. Ex.W4 is 
the community certificate. 


2 है On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७४७] Sri I.S. Appa Rao and this witness has 
exhibited 2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to M2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M. is the Settlement dated 7.I.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated 6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the 
Settlement dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the 
conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the 
Memorandum of Understanding dt. 27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. 
Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non-Messengerial Panel. Ex.MI0 is the Particulars of 992 General 
Attendant Panel. Ex.MI] is the Judgment of Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 


9]78 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


dt..5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 
dt.0.8.998. 


22 Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of 
various judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at 
appropriate place in this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel 
for both the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 


I. Whether the I“ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 3" settlement 
dated 27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99] and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered 
into between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and 
also Memorandum of Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


II. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Pokuru branch, in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri Yedluri Musaliah, a Messenger with effect from 3.7.98 is justified? 


II. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of 
Respondent management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were 


executed between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 
2(p) and 8 (4) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a 
written agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as 
may be prescribed and a copy thereof has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the 
appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[/) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the 
course of conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.8 () I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in 
the aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman 
has argued that the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the 
panel for appointment on the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has 
to be valid till last person in the empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order 
dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3] .3.97, has been issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the 
Workman has been terminated and the said order is not in consonance of the terms of the agreement 
entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the Respondent in the 5" settlement has 
mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and that is not binding upon the 
Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the aforesaid 5™ 
settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]79 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, 
SBI Zonal Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any 
temporary appointments in the Branch in messengerial category from 3.3.997. The extract of the said 
letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels 
of temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has 
been decided by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 
3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide 
letter dated 25.3.[997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in 
messengerial category from 3] .3.[997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3.3.997 
as per terms of settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 
27.3.997 issued by Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not 
to make any temporary messengerial category appointment with effect from ३].3.[997 and it has also been 
communicated to all concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by 
Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office order dated 3.3.997 has been issued by 
Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, 
“Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been decided by the 
competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary employees/appointments 
should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the aforesaid orders 
that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3.3.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers 
and daily wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3].3.]997 is contained in the 
5"" settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both 
the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 
30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of 
India Staff Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 
30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 
990 Il LLJ 50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 76(/) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was 
fixed at 55 years. The settlement was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, 
incorporating practically the same terms, was again entered into on 4th February /967 under Section 
26(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited 
jurisdiction. It can only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not 
and is within the parameters of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no 
jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act 
between the representatives of the Workmen and of the Management, is vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The Authority, namely, the Assistant 
Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have jurisdiction to go into the 
question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes Act by an 
Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 


Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 


980 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


47(/) of the A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of 
any such settlements. If parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for 
them to agitate the matter before the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted 
under Section 47(/) of the A.P. Shops and Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any 
such question and, that too, incidentally while deciding whether retirement as per the contract of 
employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any 
terms of settlement/ agreement on the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a 
competent authority under the Act, 947. But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that 
aforementioned settlement has been entered into between the parties on the ground of undue influence or 
misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred to raise any objection in respect of fixing the 
date of lapse of both panels on ३].3.]997 as agreed between both the parties and Workman can not 
challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 
322, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call 
for a finding at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On 
the other hand, we feel that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely 
erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. 
Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in scanning the evidence given by the company and 
Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had been explained by the President of the 
union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the settlement knowing all the 


"consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the 
picture. It is not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since 
a recognised union, which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement 
in the best interests of labour. This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional 
cases where there may be allegations of mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. 
Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That 
being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of collective bargaining and, therefore, is 
entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and 
others bad. Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely 
outweighs all the other advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and 
unjust. The settlement has to be accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole 
as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority 
of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As 
stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the fact that all workmen of the company 
have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired and we are informed that 
the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further improvements. These 
factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony when a 
union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9I8] 


bargaining have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the 
settlement as fair and just and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement 
dated October 76, /9435, The said settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of 


22 


accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.’ 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of 
the Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the 
permanent post vide 57 Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized 
union of Workmen has negotiated with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of 
Workmen and the Workman as individual do not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work 
as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and in response of Notification he had applied for 
inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion his name in the panel list to be utilized 
for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority in the list. The Settlement 
dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under 
Sec.2(p) and Sec.8() of LD. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position and it is 
agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, 
Agreement dated 30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the 
panels on 3].3.997 and absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy 
of post likely to arise upto 3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State 
Bank of India in view of provision contained under section 8 (]) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated 
his services by oral order on 3.7.98 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in 
lieu thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision 
contained Under Section 25 F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in 
any preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, 
the Workman has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from 
service by Respondent on 3.7.98 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before 
examining the claim of the Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained 
under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been 
in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer 


until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and 
the period of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period 
of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to 
fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of 


six months; and 


982 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be 
specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/)4 Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in 
uninterrupted service, including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized 
leave or an accident or a strike which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due 
to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (7) for a period of one year 


or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date 
with reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less 
than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from 
the date of termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove 
this factum by adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the 
reference of decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This 
claim was denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 
240 days in the year preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is 
in his favor and that cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the 
conclusion that in fact the claimant had worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in 
Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 
days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere non-production of the muster roll for a 
particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the Workman had worked for 240 days 


as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the 
Workman to show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his 
alleged retrenchment." In M.P. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again 
reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: "The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour 
Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of 


reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the 
Apex Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 


days of service." 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 963 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 498] SCC page 225 has laid 
down the principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year it is held: "Clause (2)(a) 
provides for a fiction to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact 
that he has not rendered uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 
days during the period of 2 calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the 
relevant date being the date of retrenchment. In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in 
clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant date, ie the date of termination of service which 
is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move backward to a period of /2 months 
just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the period of /2 months, the 
Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively answered in 
favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility 
qualification enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the 
legislative exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect 


because in Surendra Kumar Verma and Ors. v. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New 


Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur 
Enamel and Stamping Works (2) Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman 
who has actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months 
shall be deemed to have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact 
been in such continuous service for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days ina 
period of /2 months, it is not necessary that he should have been in the service of the employer for one 


whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on 
principle and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman 
is not in employment for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days 
within the period of /2 calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. 
the date of retrenchment. If he has, he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one 


year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of 
proof lies upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent 
just preceding from the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 
240 days service provision contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble 
Apex Court, we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in 
respect of his claim of 240 days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“ My service was for total no. of 852 days spread with gaps from time to time for the period from /9/735 to 


I was not sponsored by any employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 
days in a year continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


984 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WW that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. 
Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or 
payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked 
with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending 
upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary 
slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on 
temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he 
was terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of 
their respective seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, 
Respondent contended that no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should 
be continued in the bank work as the very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. 
Therefore, the allegation that the bank has indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force 
in the argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from 
service by order dated ३].7.98 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the 
branch. Further, there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage 
any daily wager Workman/ temporary Worker w.e.f. 3.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman 
does not amount to termination. Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated 
in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the I.D. Act, 947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral 
or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a twelve months of calendar 
year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State 
Bank of India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they 
have been advised by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 
989 and daily wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office 
not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial cadre from 3].3.[997, therefore it was directed to 
issue suitable instructions not to make temporary appointments from 3.3.997. There is no mention in this 
order that the Workman herein has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial 
network in respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed 
not to make any temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has 
directed to ensure that no temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed 
to all Branch Managers that any deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do 
not reflect that the Workman has been terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.[997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank 
by DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman 
that he has been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.]997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the 
service by the Respondent is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal 
that he had worked as a daily wager for which he has been paid wages according to number of working 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 985 


days. As there was an order for prohibition for engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, 
Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work from 3.3.997 and there after. It is settled 
law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon the availability of work and as the 
work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent management. Therefore, 
the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank cannot claim any 
right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory condition of 
240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the disengagement 
of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 25 B 
of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to 
implement the selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods 
contrary to the settlements and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 
8..993 a copy of the same is filed in the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim 
statement. Further, it is submitted that management has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central 
Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but same was not followed in the year 997 
despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through 
employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein. 
The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of 
June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are 
litigating the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies 
of call letters issued are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the 
panels are meant for absorption but not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the 
Respondent management to engage the empanelled candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary 
vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of 
temporary employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings 
and agreement was arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was 
agreed between the Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers /casual labour would be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore 
set out settlements will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that 
the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management 
bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(l) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 
957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter may be referred to as 57 
settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 5" settlement dated 30.7.996 whereunder the 
earlier four settlements dated 7.I.987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.l.l99I were also referred, it was 
agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and 
daily wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies 
existing/arrived at as on 3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that 
thereafter the said panels would lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above 
settlements the modalities about drawing names from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel 
of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided administratively on circle to circle basis depending 
upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s affiliate by the Circle management. It 


986 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate cadre including part-time 
attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. Further, Respondent 
contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the Federation’s 
affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial 
vacancies were sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies 
may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed 
between the Federations affiliate and the management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 


both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual employees would lapse on 3[.3.[997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is 
exhausted by appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3.3.997, i.e., the 
date fixed for the lapse of panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has 
been fixed to 3].3.]997 as mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It 
is settled law that and once the life of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be 
extended beyond that date. In the instant case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.[997 in 
view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" Settlement entered into between the parties. As the 
lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 
Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate 
Bank and Ors vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309, therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work 
as temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government 
of India in respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank 
issued a circular to all of its branches on /4.6. /982, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the 
old practice from 7.6./982 and appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a 
panel of eligible candidates, after calling names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it 
up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the 
Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for the period 7.2. /987 to 6.2. /968, By 
its letter dated 7.2, /98/ the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel was valid for one year only 
and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek permanent 
appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /9868, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get 
any right, because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of 
the Bank. Whatever conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the 
Respondents, as contained in the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single 
Judge and the Division Bench, when it first decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition 
and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and 
conditions of the 57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even 
after 3].3.[997 till the last Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the 
Workman is baseless in view of recital in the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and 
finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 987 


therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.8() of the I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that 
life of panels lapsed on 3].3.]997 in view of terms of settlement dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman 
that the panel shall continue even after 3.3.997 till last man absorbed has no legal force and same 
is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen 
were to be given a chance for permanent appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 
994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees were to be considered against the vacancies arise from 
January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls 
upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent management was subject to the 
availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The workmen given chance to the 
permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman herein was junior to 
those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being junior to other 
workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MWI in chief statement has given the evidence 
that, “The Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service in a calendar year.” Although this witness was 
cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness ४७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the 
claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. 
Further, witness ०७] in his chief statement has stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non- 
messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for administrative exigencies. The Petitioner 
did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 months.” This statement of 
witness १०७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness ४७४] on this 
point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria 
of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of ५०४], the claim of the Petitioner 
that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the 
employment of the Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed 
on 3.3.997 in contravention of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of 
temporary and daily wagers was to provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists 
exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 
has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 
30.7.996 was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(l) of ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial 
Dispute (Central) Rules 957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this 
settlement parties thereto agreed that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual 
employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with 
consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is binding upon the Workman under the 
provision of Section 8(/) of ILD. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding force of the settlement dated 
7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9..99] has already been discussed, decided at finding in Point 


988 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of 
panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of 
Workman for his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his 
regularization to permanent post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and 
Natural Gas Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant 
therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on 
permanent posts. Hon’ble Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen 
to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction 
to order regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the 
provisions contained in Article /<4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the 
status of permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair 
labour practice by not filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing 
to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as 


regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no 
posts are available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the 


number of years of service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it 
would be open to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have 
been regularised to make a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the 
benefit would amount to a violation of Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth 
Schedule of the ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and 
continuing them for years, with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant 
matter the Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that 
the employer has indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such 
posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite 
their performance was the same work, as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.]997 has been filled up 
from the panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.997 remained unfilled. 
Further, it is contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, 
hence, there is no occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman failed 
to prove contrary by any evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were 
existing as on 3].3.997 and the workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his 
seniority. It is settled law that the power to create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial 
domain and where no posts are available, a direction to grant regularization would be impermissible merely 
on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the claim of the workman on this ground also not 
acceptable. 


[भागवा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9]69 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the 
permanent posts has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 
3.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by 
appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel list. Workman witness १५०४] in his cross examination 
has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the 
panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel. The Workman 
failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been committed by the Respondent in 
appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended 
beyond 3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was 
included got expired on 3.3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized 
similarly situated workmen either in the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same 
benefit on par with those workmen or the vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i-e., 
3].3.]997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997. This 
Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the permanent post in contravention of the 
provision of Article 4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 
date of judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are 
governed by a statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without 
following the provisions of the recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as 


also the constitutional scheme of equality as contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India 


would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was 
permissible, but by reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in 
service or made permanent in absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has 
completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that 
his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for 
absorption merely on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. 
As regard plea of the Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 
3.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending 
upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the 
absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter 
Workman utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of 
service within a period of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., 
the date of retrenchment, if has he would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. 
Therefore, the provision contained under Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme 
Court and few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (]) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme 
Court have held:- 


990 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to 
conform to Article /4० the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no 
unfettered discretion in public law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. 
This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of 
this obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or legitimate expectation in every 
citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element 
forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State actions. To satisfy this 
requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due 
weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or 
else that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from 
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to 
challenge on the ground of arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the 


I 


exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.’ 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP 
No.93/997, therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that 
it was a permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his 
services were not liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. 
Shastry award warrants that no temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is 
now covered by two division bench judgements dated 28, //. /986 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. ॥/967 in 
W.A. No.270 of /962., The ratio decided in the two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any 
mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the requirement was for appointment on 
temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary appointee is ousted from 
service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the case of such 
temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 48, therein 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities 
must consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and 
his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of 
the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to 
instant case of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and ७५७। 
in chief examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7.].987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.l99] were 
entered into between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 
for those temporary employees who has worked on scale wages. Further, ०७४] 59०९४ that two different 
panels for messengers and non-messengers as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are 
four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. 
७४] states that the temporary employees so empanelled were given permanent absorption depending 
upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. ७४] states that on 9.6.995 conciliation 
proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it was decided that the panels 
will be kept live up to 3.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists concurrently. A copy of the 
said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, ७] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was 


[भाग वा--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9I9] 


entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising 
up to December 994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel 
so prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 4995 to December 996, 
thereafter the said panels lapse. ४७४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in 
subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 
३3].3.[997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen 
vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases 
empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, 
witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI 
Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M7 is the 
copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the statements giving the particulars 
of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 
is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 
panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per 
seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, 
MW/I states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular 
process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary 
employees were terminated from service by the bank. Further, ७७] states that the vacancies were filled 
up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms 
of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness '/४४। 
has proved the documents +#. ५] to ?ोड]2 and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४। 
was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as 
to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.]997 
and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness ७४७] was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness १४७७] states that panels 
were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were 
made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized 
after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the 
aforesaid testimony of the MWI in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained 
uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the 
branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, वा and III, the Workman 
is not entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating 
the services of Sri Yedluri Musaliah, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.7.98 is justified. 
Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman 
sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


992 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [Part II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected 
and signed by me on this the 6" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 
Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Yedluri Musaliah ४४]: Sri IS. Appa Rao 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


5.५४]: Photocopy of study record sheet 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W4: Photocopy of community certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.7..87 


Ex.M?2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.6.7.88 


Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.27.0.988 


Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation dt.9..99] 


Ex.M5S: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) 
dt.9.6.995 
Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff 


Federation dt.30.7.996 


Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of 989 messenger panel. 
Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of 989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.MI0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.MII: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 
Ex.M]2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 993 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 739.—siteifra विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार स्टेट बैंक ऑफ़ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकार श्री नागभूषण सरमा 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औघोगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औघ्योगिक अधिकरण श्रम न्यायालय, 
हैदराबाद के पंचाट (44/2003) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं Ve-(2025/0/2026-ang आर (4.I)-75] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 6th August, 2026 


S.O. 739.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 4/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of State 
Bank of India and their workman Sri M. Nagabhushana Sarma. 


[No. L-2025/0/2026-IR(B-I)-75] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 6" day of June, 2026 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 4/2003 
[Old ID No. 24/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 


Sri M. Nagabhushana Sarma, 
S/o Viswanadham, 
Cumbum, 
Prakasam distt. 
... Petitioner 
And 


l. The Chairman, 
State Bank of India, 
Central office, 
Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 
(Personnel) 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street 
Hyderabad. 
3. The Branch Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Cumbum branch. 
4. The Zonal Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal office, 
Tirupathi. ..... Respondents 


Appearances: 


For the Petitioner : M/s. S. Prasada Rao, Advocates 
Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 


994 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


For the Respondent: Sri K. Rathanga Pani Reddy, Advocate 
Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


Sri M. Nagabhushana Sarma who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed 
this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier 
Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been 
transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 24/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H- 
026//200-IR(C.II) dated 8.0.200I and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 4व/2003. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated !7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20l4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20l4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20I9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 995 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from ..86 to 994 and has 
rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about !2 years. The Respondent has terminated services of 
Workman by oral orders with effect from 994. Further, it is submitted that the management of Respondent bank 
decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent appointment” by wait- 
listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlkement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after !.7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after |.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7.].87 is the | 
settlement (Ex १॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 578 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9] is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2 of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 


996 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated !6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.!.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 997 


should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7.!.87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from 3.3.!997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary 
to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated l6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3] .3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Il.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlkement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period 987 to 99l. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99 as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7.l.987. This is the second settlement. 


998 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between !995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, 997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5 फ settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.!996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days ina 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 999 


the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and !6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claam Workman has examined himself as WWI and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to W5. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of 
his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI is the service certificate. Ex.W2 is the service certificate. Ex.W3 is the service certificate. Ex.W4 is the 
transfer certificate. Ex.W5 is the interview call letter. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness 0७४७४] Sri LS. Appa Rao and this witness has exhibited 
2 documents, marked as Ex.M] to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.| is the Settlement dated 7..I987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated !6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.Mé4 is the Settlement dated 9..99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.!995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of !989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2™ settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 4" settlement dated 9..99! and 5™ settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, in terminating the services of Workman Sri M. 
Nagabhushana Sarma, a Messenger with effect from 994 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


9200 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 


25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 
between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 (L) of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8(l) provides as follows:- 
36. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (4) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3|.3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from 3[.3.[997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3].3. [997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from 3.3.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from 3.3.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., 989 & 992 on 3].3.[997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.]997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from 3[.3. [997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from 3].3.[997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3[.3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 7966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 920I 


entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6(/). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.[997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section 76 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 


9202 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8(l) of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 994without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
994without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on merit 
it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 


[भाग II-—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9203 


SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. y. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and_ Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3].3.997. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“ My service was for total no. of 403 days spread over with gaps from time to time during the period from /9609- 


I was not sponsored by employment exchange. ..... It is not true to suggest that I never worked for 240 days in a year 
continuously and I was casual worker I am not entitled for any relief.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of १४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any |2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.!997. Thus, the claim of the 
Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 


9204 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, |947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 994rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there was 
direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ temporary 
Worker w.e.f. 3!.3.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. Moreover, the 
Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of the LD. Act, 
947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.[997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from 3.3.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to 
make temporary appointments from 3!.3.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3.3.!997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from 3].3.[997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 B of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated I8.!.993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9205 


candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3[.3,[997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 57 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge 
the same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /9862, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2./967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./98/7 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


9206 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
57 Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.[997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MW in chief statement has given the evidence that, “The 
Petitioner has not completed 240 days of service ina calendar year.” Although this witness was cross examined by 
the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness 
५७४] was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has 
stated that, “The temporary messengers and Non-messengers were engaged by the bank in leave vacancies and for 
administrative exigencies. The Petitioner did not work continuously for 240 days in any year or over a period of 36 
months.” This statement of witness MWI remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the 
witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil 
eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Therefore, in view of the statement of ०७४], the claim of the Petitioner that he was 
refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3!.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3, [997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8(/) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
ie., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9207 


filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3].3. [997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.!996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness WWI in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3].3.[997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3].3, [997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


9208 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.68. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ५७४७ and MW! in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MW! states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. ५७ ।] 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MW] states that on 30.7.996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January [995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. ४४] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3l.3.!997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on 3.3.997. 
Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9209 


understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.!997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the copy of the 
statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 989 non- 
messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner was included 
in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be 
given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made strictly in 
accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, 
number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, MW states petitioner 
was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection required for 
appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his entire temporary 
service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by the bank. 
Further, ५७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from the panels 
and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb such 
employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents +5. | to Ex.MI2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ४०७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness MW] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the ॥५४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri M. Nagabhushana Sarma, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 994 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 6""day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri M. Nagabhushana Sarma MWI: Sri I.S. Appa Rao 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W2: Photocopy of service certificate 
Ex.W3: Photocopy of service certificate 


Ex.W4: Photocopy of transfer certificate 


920 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.W5S: Photocopy of interview call letter 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.7..87 

Ex.M2: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 

Ex.M3: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 

Ex.M4: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 

Ex.M5: Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 

Ex.M6: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 

Ex.M7: Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Ex.M8: Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 

Ex.M9: Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Ex.M0: Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Ex.M]: Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 

+5./ | 2: Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4740.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का i4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पोस्ट ग्रेजुएट इंस्टीट्यूट ऑफ़ मेडिकल एजुकेशन एंड रिसर्च (पीजीआईएमईआर); मेसर्स ओम सिक्‍योरिटी एंड क्लीनिंग 
सर्विसिज़ के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्रीमती पार्वती देवी के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय-2, चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 270/2024) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, 
प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025/07/2026-60-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 740.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 270/2024) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research (PGIMER); M/s Om 
Security & Cleaning Services and Smt. Parwati Devi which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-60-(R(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 
(Presided over by Mr. Kamal Kant). 
ID No.270/2024 


Parwati Devi W/o Sh. Ramlal, R/o House १२०.।067/0, Badi Karor, Near Church, Naya Gaon, SAS Nagar, 
Mohali. 


waonnnn- Workman 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 92i] 


Versus 


l. Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research (PGIMER), through its Director, Sector 2, 
Chandigarh. 


2. M/s Om Security & Cleaning Services, through its Proprietor & Manager, Head office E-94, Sector 63, 
Noida, UP-20307. 


Local Address:- SCO 85, Sector 38C, Chandigarh. 


----Respondents 


Present:- Sh. Satyavir Singh, AR for workman. 
None for respondent no.| & 2. 


Respondent no.2 already ex parte. 


Order : 06.02.2026 


l. The workman has filed the present claim petition under Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 
(hereinafter called as Act) against her termination dated 07.06.2023 claiming reinstatement with full back 
wages along with all consequential benefits. 


2. The case is taken up in Special Campaign for disposal of pending cases. Today, AR for workman made 
following statement:- 


“Stated that on the instruction of the workman Smt. Parwati Devi, I withdraw this 
ID case time being.” 


3. या view of the statement of AR for workman, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a 'No Claim 
Award’. Accordingly, 'No Claim Award' is passed in the present petition. 


4. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 47 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 744.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारत के नियंत्रक एवं महालेखापरीक्षक; प्रधान महालेखाकार (ऑडिट); महालेखाकार (ए एंड ई) के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री पीपल मोहम्मद के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, 
चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 05/2025) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-464-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


8.0. 74.—In pursuance of Section 47 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the 
Central Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 05/2025) of the Central Government 
Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial 
dispute between the employers in relation to Comptloller & Auditor General of India; Principal 
Accountant General (Audit); Accountant General (A&E) and Shri Pipal Mohammad which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-64-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


922 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Chandigarh 
(Present:- Mr. Kamal Kant, PO-cum-Link Officer). 


ID No.05/2025 


Pipal Mohammad S/o Sh. Kaimdin, aged about 56 R/o village Todar Majra, PO Majatri, Tehsil Kharar, 
District Mohali-l40307. 
धर Workman 
Versus 


l. Comptloller & Auditor General of India, !0, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-!0002 
(Deleted) 
2. Principal Accountant General (Audit), Punjab, Plot No.20-2, Sector 7, Chandigarh-!6007. 
3. Accountant General (A&E), Punjab, Sector |7, Chandigarh-6007. 
------ Respondents 


Present:- Sh. Jagdeep Jaswal, AR for workman. 
Sh. Brijesh Mittal, AR for respondent no. Ito 3. 


AWARD : 28.04.2026 


l. Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana vide order dated !9.05.2025 passed in CWP No.26760 of 209 
titled as Bhag Singh and others versus Comptroller and Auditor General of India and others has referred this 
matter under Section I0A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter called the Act) to this Tribunal 
observing that if applicant challenge his termination, the question of limitation shall not be gone into and the 
Labour Court/Industrial Court shall examine their grievance in terms of Section I0A of the Act by taking 
dispute directly. It is also made clear that the dismissal of appeal by the Central Administrative Tribunal shall 
not come in the way. It is under these circumstances, the present petition has been filed by the workman 
challenging his oral termination dated 02.05.207. 


2: Brief facts of the case, as per claim statement of workman, are that the workman was employed as Casual 
Labourer by the Respondent No.3 against the regular sanction post w.e.f. 3.08.2003 and has been 
continuously working till 02.05.207. Workman worked with the management continuously and completed 
more than 240 days in the year 20l6 and 207. He has also worked 240 days preceding one year from the date 
of his termination on 02.05.207. 


3. Workman was engaged on the sanctioned posts through legal process and worked for more than 3 years, but 
he was not granted temporary status despite of the instructions issued by Government of India dated 
0.09.993 on the ground that the said scheme was only for one time. 


4. As per the information received by the workman, still 28 posts of MTS are vacant in the office of respondent 
No.3 against which, the workman was continuously working. Management outsourced the work of the 
workman and removed the workman from his work. The respondent No.2 has ordered verbally not to report 
for work on 02.05.207, without giving any notice in writing. The workman orally requested the respondents 
to regularize his services also in accordance with the rules and at par with the other Casual Labourers who has 
been regularized or given temporary status. But instead of regularizing the services of the workman, the 
respondent no.! has outsourced the services through some contractors. 


5. Services of workman were dispensed with whereas, his juniors were retained in service, which was in violation 
of Section 25H of the Act. It is further maintained that no compensation was given to the workman, which is in 
violation of Section 25F of the Act. Workman was eligible for regularization of his service as 28 posts of MTS 
are lying vacant in the office of respondent no.3. Workman filed OA No.60/470/20l7 dated 02.05.207 in 
Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh (hereinafter called as CAT Chandigarh) and vide order 
dated 03.05.207, Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh directed the respondent to allow the workman and others to 
continue till !2.05.20I7. The said OA was finally dismissed on 23.04.20i9. Applicant also filed review 
application, which was also dismissed on 22.08.209. Workman challenged the said order before the Hon'ble 
High Court by filing CWP No.26760/209 and the matter was relegated to this Tribunal by the High Court. 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Jaggo V/s Union of India and others (2024 INSC 7034) held that 


termination of casual employees working since long is unfair and they are to be regularized. 


6. It is maintained that the work performed by the workman is of perennial in nature. It is prayed that claim of the 
workman may be allowed and oral termination dated 02.05.20l7 may be declared illegal and arbitrary and 
workman be reinstated back in service and deemed to be in service with all consequential benefits and be also 
held entitled for full back wages from the date of his termination. 


7. 


0. 


Il. 


2; 


3. 


4. 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 923 


Notice of petition was given to the respondents, who filed reply thereof maintaining therein that the workman 
was engaged as casual worker for performing work on seasonal basis as per need and requirement of work by 
office of respondent No.2 w.e.f. 3.08.2003 and performed duty for a period of 563 days. As per office 
records the payment to casual workers including the workman was being made through Contingent Bill 
Register (2009-200) under the Head "Wages' and the name of the workman finds mentioned at Serial No.26 
therein. The GOI DOPT OM dated 0.09.993 providing for temporary status/regularization categorically 
provided for conferment of temporary status on all casual labourers who were in employment on the date of 
issue of OM and who have rendered a continuous service of atleast one year i.e. engaged for a period of 240 
days. The workman has never completed a period of 240 days. The workman is himself admitting to having 
been engaged in !3.08.2003 does not get covered under the said scheme which was only for those casual 
labourers who were in employment on the date of issue of OM i.e. 0!.09.993. Hence, the submissions 
regarding grant of temporary status to the Workman is misconceived. Moreover, in the previous litigations 
filed by the Workman before Hon'ble CAT Chandigarh Bench, the said relief of temporary/regularization was 
never sought/pleaded by the Workman and earlier stage also. 


The regular post of MTS, if vacant/available, with the department shall be filled up on direct recruitment basis 
to be conducted by SSC as per provisions of relevant Recruitment Rules. At earlier point of time, in pursuance 
to advertisement dated 24.09.20I for filling up the post of MTS on direct recruitment basis, the application of 
workman belonging to BC Category was duly considered and he was granted all the admissible relaxations of 
age, period of his engagement as casual labourer etc. However, since he was overage by more than 04 १४ 
years, even after grant of all admissible relaxation, his application was rejected on account of being overage. 
The Workman assailed the said rejection of his candidature with respect to direct recruitment by filing OA 
No.43/CH/203 decided on 0.02.204 before Hon'ble CAT Chandigarh which stood dismissed. 


On the basis of recommendations of 6" CPC to the effect that Govt. is required to outsource certain activities 
by providing employment in the form of contract labour and the said outsourcing would be discontinued when 
the regular incumbents joined and the CAG Headquarter office in February-March 20!7 had not considered the 
funds/budget for making payment of wages/disbursement of salary to directly engaged daily wagers. Since 
there was no scheme for regularization of services except for granting adequate relaxation for the period of his 
engagement as Casual Labourer w.e.f. 3.08.2003 to 24.0.20] as well as other admissible relaxations, prior 
to filling up the post of MTS through direct recruitment, the service of workman could not have been 
regularized and neither he could have been conferred with temporary status under the scheme being not in 
employment during 993. 


Workman is making contradictory statement in his claim statement. He is contending that his services have 
been orally terminated w.e.f. 02.05.207 and further he is also contending that he was replaced by other 
individuals during 203-204. The non-assailing of his replacement by other individuals at the relevant time in 
203-204 under the relevant provisions of the Act and availing his remedies before Ld. CAT and thereafter, 
before Hon'ble High Court makes the present claim statement time barred by limitation by calculating the 
period from 203-204 respectively. 


The workman himself sought discharge from services vide his application dated 0.08.20I4. Had the letter 
dated 0.08.204 being fabricated document, the workman could have availed his legal remedies to prove the 
said letter as fabricated one from competent court of law and neither any said contention was raised by him at 
earlier point of time by making submissions qua the same in cases filed by workman before Hon'ble CAT/High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana. 


Further, there is no scheme of regularization in the management department and the available post of MTS 
shall be filled up on the basis of open competition/direct recruitment to be conducted by SSC strictly in terms 
of Statutory Recruitment Rules for the post of MTS. 


Workman has already availed his remedies after his disengagement by filing appropriate cases before Hon'ble 
CAT Chandigarh Bench as well as Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court and the present claim statement 
filed by the Workman being misconceived and against the relevant provisions of rules and law, deserves to be 
dismissed outrightly in the interest of justice. 


It is added here that AR for respondents moved an application for dropping the name of respondent no.| from 
the array of parties for the reasons mentioned in the application and AR for workman gave no objection and 
application was allowed. However, in this case, all the respondents have jointly filed written statement. 
Respondent no.! is the controlling authority of respondent no.2 & 3 and thus was a formal party. 


924 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Evidence of workman:- 


(55% 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as WWI and tendered into evidence his affidavit 
Ex.WWI/A and has been cross examined by the AR for respondents. AR for workman closed the evidence on 
5.04.2026. 


List of documents:- 


Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit/Mark 
l. Attendance Ex.WWI/I 
2. Work report 23.0.203 Mark A 
3. Letter 7.03.207 Mark B 
4 Letter 29.03.207 Mark C 
3 Letter 0.04.207 Mark D 
=e Letter 3.04.207 Mark E 
7 Letter 25.04.207 Mark F 
[es | ‘ Order of Hon'ble CAT 03.05.207 Mark G 
= Order of Hon'ble CAT 23.04.209 Mark H 
0. Order of Hon'ble High Court 9.05.2025 Mark I 
Il. Summary of working days Mark J 


Evidence of respondents:- 


6. 


Respondent no.l& 2 has examined Sh. Varinder Singh Saini, Assistant Account Officer, who tendered into 
evidence his affidavit ०७४॥/३७ and has been cross examined by AR for workman. AR for respondents closed 
the evidence on 2.04.2026. 


List of documents of respondents:- 


Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit/Mark 
l. Details of litigations Mark A 
2; Order of Hon'ble CAT 0.02.20I4 Mark B 
3. Order of Hon'ble CAT 22.08.209 Mark D 


Submissions of workman:- 


7. 


While arguing the case, Id. counsel for workman contended that in this case, workman was engaged as casual 
labour by the respondent on regular sanctioned post w.e.f. 3.08.2003 and was continuously worked till 
02.05.207 for more than 3 years and was terminated verbally on 02.05.20I7. Workman had completed 240 
days preceding the year of his termination on 02.05.207. Against the verbal termination order, workman 
along with other workmen had gone in Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh in OA No.60/470/20I7 challenging the 
termination order and had also sought regularization, which was dismissed by the Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh. 
Thereafter, workman went in High Court and High Court vide order dated 9.05.2025 has relegated the matter 
to this Tribunal. He further contended that since this Tribunal has been directed to dispose of the case in terms 
of Section !0A of the Act. In this case workman had completed 240 days, however, no compensation was 
given to him and there was violation of Section 25F of the Act. 


Submissions of respondents:- 


8. 


On the other hand, Id. counsel for respondents contended that in this case, workman was removed from service 
due to non sending of wages under wages head by the head office of respondent no.l.Instructions were also 
received from the Government of India that no direct appointment be made of casual employees and they may 
be engaged through contractors. Moreover, the workman was gainfully employed after his termination. As per 
order of Hon'ble High Court dated 9.05.2025 passed in CWP No.26760 of 209, this Tribunal is not 
competent to decide this matter. Moreover, the workman was re-engaged on 23.09.2022 on outsourcing basis. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 925 


Findings:- 


9. 
20. 


2I. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by AR for both the parties. 


The first contention regarding the claimant is that whether he comes within the definition of ‘workman’ as is 
defined in Section 2(s) of the Act. I may mention that claimant was working as casual labour as per his claim 
petition and affidavit submitted before the Tribunal. In plain words the claimant was performing his duties as 
labourer/unskilled worker. He was not in supervisory or administrative post requiring him to perform only 
administrative duties. While interpreting Section 2(s) Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Devinder Singh 


Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20l] Supreme Court 2532, has observed as follows:- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at all 
relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the meaning of Section 2(s) 
of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make any distinction between full time and 
part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the plain 
language of Section 2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on regular 
basis or a person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on 
temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty 
for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


Thus, Hon’ble Supreme Court has clarified that the definition of workman also does not make any distinction 
between full time or part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in plain 
language of Section 2(s) from which it can be infer that only person employed on regular basis or a person 
employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman. In view of the 
ratio of law enunciated in the above ruling, in my considered opinion the claimant herein admittedly falls 
within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


Next question which arises for consideration is whether respondents are an industry. The Hon’ble Apex Court 
in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa /978(36) FLR 266 dealt at length 
with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act, and has laid down 
triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is industry or not. The triple test is where (a) 
systematic activity (b) organised by cooperation between employer and employee (the direct and substantial 
element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of goods and services to calculated to satisfy 
human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that enterprise. To support this view, reliance can be 


placed on Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra). 


In the present case, respondent is a government body and is engaged in systematic activity organized by 
cooperation between employer and employee (employee being workman in the present case) and is covered 
under the Act. 


Further, Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Chief Conservator of Forest Versus Jagannath Maruti 
Kondhare (7996 (2) SCT 264), has held that work, which was not be regarded as a part of inalienable of 


inescapable function of the State and which work can be well undertaken by a private agency does not require 
an instrumentality of State, such functions of the State fall within the ambit of Industry. Thus, function being 
done by the respondents cannot be said to be sovereign function of the State and thus for this purpose of 
industrial dispute, respondents would be termed as industry. Thus, respondents are industries for the purpose 
they were engaging casual labour and thus functions cannot be said to be sovereign function of State. 


So far as this argument of Ld. counsel for respondents that this Tribunal is incompetent to entertain the ID case 
under Section I0A of the Act. In this regard, it is pointed out that High Court vide its order dated 9.05.2025 
passed in CWP No.26760 of 209 has directed as under:- 


If the writ petitioners challenge their termination, question of limitation shall not be gone into, and 
the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall examine their grievances in terms of Section l0A of the 
Act, by taking up the dispute directly. If such an application is filed by the petitioners within period 
of one month, the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall attempt to decide the same expeditiously, 
preferably within a period of one month from today. It is made clear that the dismissal of appeal by 
the Central Administrative Tribunal shall not come in their way. 


Further, Section 0A of the Act read as follows:- 


926 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Voluntary reference of disputes to arbitration —(l) Where any industrial dispute exists or is 
apprehended and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the dispute to arbitration, they may, 
at any time before the dispute has been referred under section 707 a Labour Court or Tribunal or 
National Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall 
be to such person or persons (including the presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or 
National Tribunal) as an arbitrator or arbitrators as may be specified in the arbitration agreement. 


From co-joint reading of Section l0A of the Act and order of High Court dated 9.05.2025, it emerges 
that High Court has referred this matter for adjudicating as arbitrator with the consent of both the parties. 
Hence, the application under Section I0A is very much maintainable before this Tribunal. 


Next question is whether the workman has completed 240 days preceding one year from the date of his 
termination on 02.05.207. In this regard, it is pertinent to mention here that the workman has placed on 
record, vide which he has worked 287 days prior to 02.05.20!7 as per attendance register ( 5.४४५७४।/।) and 
summary of working days (Mark J) for the period May 206 to May 20I7. Even attendance register is on the 
file. Hence, the workman is able to prove that he has worked for about 287 days preceding one year prior to his 
termination on 02.05.207. There is thus violation of Section 25F of the Act, which read as follows: - 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.—No workman employed in any industry who 


has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by 
that employer until— 


(a) the workman has been given one month’s notice in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wages for the period of the notice; 


(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part 
thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as 
may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 


Since in this case, applicant is workman as defined under the Act and was removed from service without 
compliance of the Section 25F of the Act, which provide payment of retrenchment compensation as well as 
wages in lieu of notice for the period of notice. Thus, due to breach of Section 25F of the Act, workman is 
entitled for reinstatement. So far as violation of Section 25G and 25H is concerned, no evidence is given by the 
workman regarding violation of Section 25G and 25H of the Act. Hence, it is deemed that applicant has failed 
to prove violations of Sections 25G and 25H of the Act. 


Under these circumstances, the workman is reinstated into service. But so far as back wages are concerned, the 
workman was working as a labourer in factory of Mohali after his termination from May 207 till 23.09.2022 
and he has been re-engaged by the management on outsource basis after 23.09.2022, hence, he is entitled for 
50% back wages for the period May 207 to 23.09.2022 as he might have been under paid in the factory. 
However, it is made clear that in view of the instructions of Government of India that no casual employee can 
be taken directly by the respondents, workman would continue to work with the respondents through 
contractor till attaining age of his superannuation/retirement, even if contractor is changed as it is specific case 
of the workman in his application before this Tribunal that work assigned to him is of perennial nature and 
there is no denial of this fact by the respondents. 


As regards regularization of workman, no prayer is made by the AR for workman nor it was argued by the AR 
for workman how the workman was entitled for regularization of his services. 


Let copy of this award be sent to Central Government for publication as required under Section |7 of the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, PO-cum-Link Officer 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 927 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


PUA. 742.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारत के नियंत्रक एवं महालेखापरीक्षक; प्रधान महालेखाकार (ऑडिट); महालेखाकार (ए एंड ई) के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री भाग सिंह के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय-2, 
चंडीगढ़, Tare (रिफरेन्स न.- 04/2025) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं., एल-42025/07/2026-465-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 742.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 04/2025) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Comptloller & Auditor General of India; Principal Accountant General (Audit); Accountant 
General (A&E) and Shri Bhag Singh which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-65-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Chandigarh 
(Present:- Mr. Kamal Kant, PO-cum-Link Officer). 
ID No.04/2025 
Bhag Singh S/o Suba Singh, aged about 59 years R/o Village Tole Majra, P.O. Rasanheri, Tehsil Kharar, Mohali-!40307. 


wann--- Workman 
Versus 
l. Comptloller & Auditor General of India, 0, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-l0002 
(Deleted) 
2. Principal Accountant General (Audit), Punjab, Plot No.20-2, Sector 7, Chandigarh-6007. 
3. Accountant General (A&E), Punjab, Sector 7, Chandigarh-6007. 
w----- Respondents 


Present:- Sh. Jagdeep Jaswal, AR for workman. 


Sh. Barjesh Mittal, AR for respondent no.! to 3. 


Award : 30.04.2026 


l. Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana vide order dated 9.05.2025 passed in CWP No.26760 of 209 titled as Bhag 
Singh and others versus Comptroller and Auditor General of India and others has referred this matter under Section l0A of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter called the Act) to this Tribunal observing that if applicant challenge his 
termination, the question of limitation shall not be gone into and the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall examine their 
grievance in terms of Section l0A of the Act by taking dispute directly. It is also made clear that the dismissal of appeal by 
the Central Administrative Tribunal shall not come in the way. It is under these circumstances, the present petition has 
been filed by the workman challenging his oral termination dated 02.05.207. 


2: Brief facts of the case, as per claim statement of workman, are that the workman was appointed through Employment 
Exchange against the regular sanctioned post by the Respondent No.3 w.e.f. 5.0.996 and has been continuously 
working till 25.0.20!. Workman worked with the respondents continuously and completed more than 240 days in the 
year 206 and 207. He has also worked 240 days preceding one year from the date of his termination on 02.05.207. 


3: Workman was engaged on the sanctioned posts through legal process and worked for more than 0 years, but he was not 
granted temporary status despite of the instructions issued by Government of India dated 0.09.993 on the ground that the 
said scheme was only for one time. 


928 


0. 


Il. 


2. 


3. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


As per the information received by the workman, still 28 posts of MTS are vacant in the office of respondent No.3 against 
which, the workman was continuously working. Management outsourced the work of the workman and removed the 
workman from his work. The respondent No.2 has ordered verbally not to report for work on 02.05.207, without giving 
any notice in writing. The workman orally requested the respondents to regularize his services also in accordance with the 
tules and at par with the other Casual Labourers who has been regularized or given temporary status. But instead of 
regularizing the services of the workman, the respondent no.| has outsourced the services through some contractors. 


Services of workman were dispensed with, whereas, his juniors were retained in service, which was in violation of Section 
25H of the Act. It is further maintained that no compensation was given to the workman, which is in violation of Section 
25F of the Act. Workman was eligible for regularization of his service as 28 posts of MTS are lying vacant in the office of 
respondent no.3. Workman filed OA No.60/470/20l7 dated 02.05.207 in Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal, 
Chandigarh (hereinafter called as CAT Chandigarh and vide order dated 03.05.20I7, Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh directed 
the respondent to allow the workman and others to continue till 2.05.20l7. The said OA was finally dismissed on 
23.04.20I9. Applicant also filed review application, which was also dismissed on 22.08.20l9. Workman challenged the 
said order before the Hon'ble High Court by filing CWP No.26760/209 and the matter was relegated to this Tribunal by 
the High Court. Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Jaggo V/s Union of India and others (2024 INSC 034) held that 


termination of casual employees working since long is unfair and they are to be regularized. 


It is maintained that the work performed by the workman is of perennial in nature. It is prayed that claim of the workman 
may be allowed and oral termination dated 02.05.20l7 may be declared illegal and arbitrary and workman be reinstated 
back in service and deemed to be in service with all consequential benefits and be also held entitled for full back wages 
from the date of his termination. 


Notice of petition was given to the respondents, who filed reply thereof maintaining therein that the workman was engaged 
as casual worker for performing work on seasonal basis as per need and requirement of work by office of respondent No.3 
w.e.f. 5.0.996 and performed duty for a period of 2789 days upto 25.0.20lI on intermittent basis. As per office 
records the payment to casual workers including the workman was being made through Contingent Bill Register (2009- 
200) under the Head ‘Wages' and the name of the workman finds mentioned at Serial No.l6 therein. The GOI DOPT OM 
dated 0.09.993 providing for temporary status/regularization categorically provided for conferment of temporary status 
on all casual labourers who were in employment on the date of issue of OM and who have rendered a continuous service of 
atleast one year i.e. engaged for a period of 240 days. The workman has never completed a period of 240 days. The 
workman is himself admitting to having been engaged in 996 does not get covered under the said scheme which was only 
for those casual labourers who were in employment on the date of issue of OM i.e. 0.09.993. Hence, the submissions 
regarding grant of temporary status to the Workman is misconceived. Moreover, in the previous litigations filed by the 
Workman before Hon'ble CAT Chandigarh Bench, the said relief of temporary/regularization was never sought/pleaded by 
the Workman and earlier stage also. 


The regular post of MTS, if vacant/available, with the department shall be filled up on direct recruitment basis to be 
conducted by SSC as per provisions of relevant Recruitment Rules. At earlier point of time, in pursuance to advertisement 
dated 24.09.20l for filling up the post of MTS on direct recruitment basis, the application of workman belonging to 
General Category was duly considered and he was granted all the admissible relaxations of age, period of his engagement 
as casual labourer etc. However, since he was overage, even after grant of all admissible relaxation, his application was 
rejected. The Workman assailed the said rejection of his candidature with respect to direct recruitment by filing OA before 
Hon'ble CAT Chandigarh which stood dismissed. 


On the basis of recommendations of 67 CPC to the effect that Govt. is required to outsource certain activities by providing 
employment in the form of contract labour and the said outsourcing would be discontinued when the regular incumbents 
joined and the CAG Headquarter office in February-March 207 had not considered the funds/budget for making payment 
of wages/disbursement of salary to directly engaged daily wagers. Since there was no scheme for regularization of services 
except for granting adequate relaxation for the period of his engagement as Casual Labourer w.e.f. 5.0.996 to 
25.0.20l as well as other admissible relaxations, prior to filling up the post of MTS through direct recruitment, the 
service of workman could not have been regularized and neither he could have been conferred with temporary status under 
the scheme being not in employment during 993. 


Workman is making contradictory statement in his claim statement. He is contending that his services have been orally 
terminated w.e.f. 02.05.207 and further he is also contending that he was replaced by other individuals during 203-20]4. 
The non-assailing of his replacement by other individuals at the relevant time in 203-204 under the relevant provisions 
of the Act and availing his remedies before Ld. CAT and thereafter, before Hon'ble High Court makes the present claim 
statement time barred by limitation by calculating the period from 203-204 respectively. 


The workman himself sought discharge from services vide his application dated 0.08.204. Had the letter dated 
0.08.204 being fabricated document, the workman could have availed his legal remedies to prove the said letter as 
fabricated one from competent court of law and neither any said contention was raised by him at earlier point of time by 
making submissions qua the same in cases filed by workman before Hon'ble CAT/High Court of Punjab and Haryana. 


Further, there is no scheme of regularization in the management department and the available post of MTS shall be filled 
up on the basis of open competition/direct recruitment to be conducted by SSC strictly in terms of Statutory Recruitment 
Rules for the post of MTS. 


Workman has already availed his remedies after his disengagement by filing appropriate cases before Hon'ble CAT 
Chandigarh Bench as well as Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court and the present claim statement filed by the 


4, 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 929 


Workman being misconceived and against the relevant provisions of rules and law, deserves to be dismissed outrightly in 
the interest of justice. 


It is added here that AR for respondents moved an application for dropping the name of respondent no.| from the array of 
parties for the reasons mentioned in the application and AR for workman gave no objection and application was allowed. 
However, in this case, all the respondents have jointly filed written statement. Respondent no.| is the controlling authority 
of respondent no.2 & 3 and thus was a formal party. 


Evidence of workman:- 


5. 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as WW and tendered into evidence his affidavit Ex.WWI/A and 
has been cross examined by the AR for respondents. AR for workman closed the evidence on 5.04.2026. 


List of documents:- 


Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit/Mark 
५ Attendance record +#%.४४४७॥/ 
2 Work report 23.0.203 Mark A 
3. Letter 7.03.207 Mark B 
4. Letter 29.03.207 Mark C 
5. Letter 0.04.207 Mark D 
कि आल Letter 3.04.207 Mark E 
ve Letter 25.04.20I7 Mark F 
ee ; Order of Hon'ble CAT 03.05.207 Mark G 
(ee : Order of Hon'ble CAT 23.04.20I9 Mark H 
0. Order of Hon'ble High Court 9.05.2025 Mark I 
il. Summary of working days Mark J 


Evidence of respondents:- 


6. 


Respondent no.! & 2 has examined Sh. Varinder Singh Saini, Assistant Account Officer, who tendered into evidence his 
affidavit ५७॥/३७ and has been cross examined by AR for workman. AR for respondents closed the evidence on 
2.04.2026. 


List of documents of respondents:- 


Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit/Mark 

हि Details of litigations Mark A 
2. Order of Hon'ble CAT 09.2.20l6 Mark B 
3. Order of Hon'ble CAT 30.07.208 Mark C 
4. Order of Hon'ble High Court 04.09.20I7 Mark D 
5. Hon'ble High Court order 09.09.2022 Mark E 
ae Order of Hon'ble CAT 22.08.209 Mark G 
7. Work report 23.0.203 Mark I 


Submissions of workman:- 


7. 


While arguing the case, ld. counsel for workman contended that in this case, workman was engaged as casual labour by the 
respondent on regular sanctioned post w.e.f. 5.0.996 and was continuously worked till 02.05.207 for more than 20 
years and was terminated verbally on 02.05.20!7. Workman had completed 240 days preceding the year of his termination 
on 02.05.207. Against the verbal termination order, workman along with other workmen had gone in Hon'ble CAT, 
Chandigarh in OA No.60/470/20I7 challenging the termination order and had also sought regularization, which was 
dismissed by the Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh. Thereafter, workman went in High Court and High Court vide order dated 
9.05.2025 has relegated the matter to this Tribunal. He further contended that since this Tribunal has been directed to 
dispose of the case in terms of Section l0A of the Act. In this case workman had completed 240 days, however, no 
compensation was given to him and there was violation of Section 25F of the Act. 


9220 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Submissions of respondents:- 


8. 


On the other hand, Id. counsel for respondents contended that in this case, workman was removed from service due to non 
sending of wages under wages head by the head office of respondent no.l.Instructions were also received from the 
Government of India that no direct appointment be made of casual employees and they may be engaged through 
contractors. Moreover, the workman was gainfully employed after his termination. As per order of Hon'ble High Court 
dated 9.05.2025 passed in CWP No.26760 of 209, this Tribunal is not competent to decide this matter. Moreover, the 
workman was re-engaged on 23.09.2022 on outsourcing basis. 


Findings:- 


9. 
20. 


2I. 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


I have given due consideration to the arguments advanced by AR for both the parties. 


The first contention regarding the claimant is that whether he comes within the definition of ‘workman’ as is defined in 
Section 2(s) of the Act. I may mention that claimant was working as casual labour as per his claim petition and affidavit 
submitted before the Tribunal. In plain words the claimant was performing his duties as labourer/unskilled worker. He was 
not in supervisory or administrative post requiring him to perform only administrative duties. While interpreting Section 


2(s) Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20l] Supreme Court 
2532,has observed as follows:- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are not at 
all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the meaning of Section 
2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make any distinction between full 
time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the 
plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on 
regular basis or a person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one 
employed on temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or 
for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


Thus, Hon’ble Supreme Court has clarified that the definition of workman also does not make any distinction between full 
time or part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in plain language of Section 2(s) from 
which it can be infer that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for doing whole time job is a 
workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for 
doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman. In view of the ratio of law enunciated in the above ruling, in my considered 
opinion the claimant herein admittedly falls within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


Next question which arises for consideration is whether respondents are an industry. The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case 
of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa 7978(36) FLR 266 dealt at length with the ambit and scope 
of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act, and has laid down triple test for determining whether a 
particular establishment is industry or not. The triple test is where (a) systematic activity (b) organised by cooperation 
between employer and employee (the direct and substantial element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of 
goods and services to calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that enterprise. To 


support this view, reliance can be placed on Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra). 


In the present case, respondent is a government body and is engaged in systematic activity organized by cooperation 
between employer and employee (employee being workman in the present case) and is covered under the Act. 


Further, Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Chief Conservator of Forest Versus Jagannath Maruti Kondhare (/००6 
(2) SCT 764), has held that work, which was not be regarded as a part of inalienable of inescapable function of the State 


and which work can be well undertaken by a private agency does not require an instrumentality of State, such functions of 
the State fall within the ambit of Industry. Thus, function being done by the respondents cannot be said to be sovereign 
function of the State and thus for this purpose of industrial dispute, respondents would be termed as industry. Thus, 
respondents are industries for the purpose they were engaging casual labour and thus functions cannot be said to be 
sovereign function of State. 


So far as this argument of Ld. counsel for respondents that this Tribunal is incompetent to entertain the ID case under 
Section I0A of the Act. In this regard, it is pointed out that High Court vide its order dated 9.05.2025 passed in CWP 
No.26760 of 209 has directed as under:- 


If the writ petitioners challenge their termination, question of limitation shall not be gone into, and 
the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall examine their grievances in terms of Section 704 of the Act, 
by taking up the dispute directly. If such an application is filed by the petitioners within period of one 
month, the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall attempt to decide the same expeditiously, preferably 
within a period of one month from today. It is made clear that the dismissal of appeal by the Central 
Administrative Tribunal shall not come in their way. 


Further, Section 0A of the Act read as follows:- 


Voluntary reference of disputes to arbitration —(l) Where any industrial dispute exists or is 
apprehended and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the dispute to arbitration, they may, 
at any time before the dispute has been referred under section 08 a Labour Court or Tribunal or 
National Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 922[ 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


to such person or persons (including the presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National 
Tribunal) as an arbitrator or arbitrators as may be specified in the arbitration agreement. 


From co-joint reading of Section l0A of the Act and order of High Court dated 9.05.2025, it emerges that High 
Court has referred this matter for adjudicating as arbitrator with the consent of both the parties. Hence, the application 
under Section 0A is very much maintainable before this Tribunal. 


Next question is whether the workman has completed 240 days preceding one year from the date of his termination on 
02.05.207. In this regard, it is pertinent to mention here that the workman has placed on record, vide which he has worked 
283 days prior to 02.05.207 as per attendance register (5.१४५७७।/]) and summary of working days (Mark J) for the period 
May 206 to May 207. Even attendance register is on the file. Hence, the workman is able to prove that he has worked for 
about 283 days preceding one year prior to his termination on 02.05.207. There is thus violation of Section 257 of the 
Act, which read as follows:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.—No workman employed in any industry who 


has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by 
that employer until— 


(a) the workman has been given one month’s notice in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of such 
notice, wages for the period of the notice; 


(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent 
to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in 
excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as 
may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette. 


Since in this case, applicant is workman as defined under the Act and was removed from service without compliance of the 
Section 25F of the Act, which provide payment of retrenchment compensation as well as wages in lieu of notice for the 
period of notice. Thus, due to breach of Section 25F of the Act, workman is entitled for reinstatement. So far as violation of 
Section 25G and 25H is concerned, no evidence is given by the workman regarding violation of Section 25G and 25H of 
the Act. Hence, it is deemed that applicant has failed to prove violations of Sections 25G and 25H of the Act. 


Under these circumstances, the workman is reinstated into service. But so far as back wages are concerned, the workman 
was working as a labourer after his termination from May 2047 till 23.09.2022 and he has been re-engaged by the 
respondents on outsource basis after 23.09.2022, hence, he is entitled for 50% back wages for the period May 207 to 
23.09.2022 as he might have been under paid as labourer. However, it is made clear that in view of the instructions of 
Government of India that no casual employee can be taken directly by the respondents, workman would continue to work 
with the respondents through contractor till attaining age of his superannuation/retirement, even if contractor is changed as 
it is specific case of the workman in his application before this Tribunal that work assigned to him is of perennial nature 
and there is no denial of this fact by the respondents. 


As regards regularization of workman, no prayer is made by the AR for workman nor it was argued by the AR for 
workman how the workman was entitled for regularization of his services. 


Let copy of this award be sent to Central Government for publication as required under Section 7 of the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, PO-cum-Link Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. 743.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 


इंस्टिट्यूट ऑफ़ हिमालयन बायोरिसोर्स टेक्नोलॉजी; ओम प्रकाश के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री हरबंस कुमार के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2, चंडीगढ़, Tare (रिफरेन्स न.- 
43/2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-467-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


9222 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 743.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 


Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 43/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology; Om Prakash and Shri Harbans Kumar which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-67-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 


(Present:- Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer). 


ID No.43/209 


Harbans Kumar S/o Sh. Prem Chand through R K Singh Parmar, General Secretary Punjab INTUC L-2]] 
Brari PO Partap Nagar, Nangal, Tehsil Nangal, District Rupnagar (Punjab). 


a: 


wannnnn- Workman 
Versus 


Director Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, (CSIR Complex) Palampur, District Kangra, 
Himachal Pradesh. 


Om Parkash (Govt. Contractor) S/o Sh. Dumnoo Ram, R/o VPO Kandral, Tehsil Bajinath, District 
Kangra, Himachal Pradesh. 


------ Respondents 


Present:- Sh. R P Rana, AR for workman. 


Sh. 0 ७8 Sidhu, AR for respondent no.!. 


Respondent no.2 already ex parte. 


AWARD : 23.04.2026 


Workman has filed the present petition/complaint under Section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 (hereinafter called the Act) against his termination by respondent no.! & 2 on 28..2024. 


The brief facts, related to the case are that the workman was terminated orally by respondents on 
28..20i4 during the pendency of the main reference bearing no.255 of 203 contravening Section 33 
of the Act. It is prayed that termination be set aside and appropriate order be passed. 


Notice of complaint was given to the respondents. 


Respondent no.! filed reply thereof maintaining therein that the workman was never employed by 
respondent no.| and no master and servant relation exists between respondent no.! and the workman. 
Workman was deployed by respondent no.2 as a part of the man-force for executing the work in terms 
of the agreement dated |8.07.203 which expired in July, 204 and thereafter no further contract was 
awarded to respondent no.2 nor any man-force has been deployed. The respondent No.2 had been paid 
the bills submitted by him, in terms of the agreement with him. Termination of service of the workman 
is on the part of respondent No.2 i.e. contractor. In any case, since the workman was never employed 
in the service of respondent no.l, the question of violation of any service condition during the 
pendency of the reference No.255 203 does not arise against respondent no.I. It is prayed that the 
application may be rejected against respondent no. |. 


It is pertinent to mention here that respondent no.2 was proceeded ex parte on 26.02.2020. 


Evidence of parties:- 


6. 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as WWI and tendered into evidence his 
affidavit Ex.WWI/A and has been cross examined by the AR for respondent no.l. AR for workman 
closed the evidence on 22.0.2025. 


List of documents, original exhibited with ID No.85/20i5 Bir Singh Vs IHBT, photocopy placed in 
file:- 


[भाग II—~e€vs 3(4i)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9223 
Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit 
l. Bill 24.05.203 Ex.W-| 
2. Bill 22.03.202] Ex.W-2 
3. Bill 22.03.202] Ex.W-3 
4. Bill 22.07.200 Ex.W-4 
5. Bill 23.03.2007 Ex.W-5 
| _ ९. | Bill 28.03.2007 Ex.W-6 
Ts Bill 07.09.200 Ex.W-7 
8. Respondent no.l has examined Sh. Shankar Das, Controller of Administration, CSIR-IHBT, Palampur 


Palampur as सर], who tendered into evidence his affidavit RWI/A along with documents RW-I/I and 
has been cross examined by AR for workman. AR for respondent no.! closed the evidence on 


08.0.2026. 


List of documents:- 


Sr. Agreement Dated Period 
No. 
l. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 24.05.996 3.03.996 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 2.03.997 
2. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.06. 998 0.09.997 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 3.08.998 
3. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.06. 998 5.04.998 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 4.04.999 
4. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.06. 998 6.04.998 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 5.04.999 
3: Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.05.999 0.04.999 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 3.03.2000 
aa Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.05.999 0.05.999 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 30.04.2000 
7. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 28.07.2000 0.07.2000 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 30.06.200 
al ५ Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Ex.RW- | 08.07.200] 6.07.200] to 
I/l Colly) 5.07.2002 
ia Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.07.200] 6.07.200] to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 5.07.2002 
0. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.07.200] 6.07.200I to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 5.07.2002 
ll. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
2. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
3. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
4. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
5. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 22.03.2004 2.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) .08.2004 


9224 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 

| विद emer [ROI Viton” | 6. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 22.03.2004 2.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) .08.2004 

7. | Letter (Part of +5.२५७४-|/] Colly) 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
05.2.2005 

8. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/2) 05.2.2005 

9. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.2.2005 

20. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.2.2005 

2l. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.2.2005 

22. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.0.2008 06.0.2008 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.0.2009 

23. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.0.2008 06.0.2008 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.0.2009 

24. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.0.2008 06.0.2008 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.0.2009 

25. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.0.200 07.0.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.0I.202 

26. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.2.200 07.2.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.2.202 

27. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.2.200 07.2.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.2.202 

28. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.2.200 07.2.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.2.202 

29. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 09.2.20i2 09.2.202 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 08.2.204 

30. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 9.2.202 9.2.202 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 8.2.20I4 

3l. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 9.2.20I2 9.2.202 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 8.2.20I4 


Submissions of workman:- 


9. 


While arguing the case, AR for workman contended that in this case, reference was pending before this 


Tribunal bearing ID No.255 of 20I3 titled as The General Secretary, Institute of Himalayan Bio- 
Source Technology (CSIR) Shramik Sangh, Palampur, Distt. Kangra versus The Director, 


Himalayan Bio-source Technology (CSIR) regarding regularization of service and accepting all other 
demands raised by union of workers, of which present workman is also a party. During the pendency of 


that reference, workman was removed from service orally on 28.!.204 by respondent no.2 without 
seeking permission from this Court under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act, which is illegal. Workman would 
be deemed to be in the service of respondent no.!. He further contended that in this case, respondent 
no.2 was allotted contract by respondent no.! for the period 9.2.20I2 to 8.2.20l4. However, the 
said period was reduced to 30..204 and the workman was paid salary upto 28.!.204 and on that 
date, his services were dispensed with. He thus contended that the workman is liable to be reinstated into 
service. 


Submissions of respondent no.I:- 


0. 


While arguing the case, AR for respondent no.! contended that IHBT i.e. respondent no.l being 
subsidiary of CSIR is not covered under the definition of Industry as defined under the Act. To support 
this view, he place reliance upon Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and others versus 
Sri Rishi Dev Mishra and other (Writ -€ ४०. /0050/0 of 2006). 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9225 


Il. 


He further contended that there is no master and servant relation between respondent no.! and the 


workman. To support this view, he placed reliance upon Zhe Joint Secretary, Central Board of 
Secondary education and another versus Raj Kumar Mishra and another (SLP (C) No.22030 of 2023. 
He further placed reliance upon Kirlosker Brothers Ltd. Vs. Ramcharan and others (2022 INSC 7255). 


He further contended that CSIR Service Rules are not applicable to the workman. No appointment letter 
was given to the workman. He thus contended that the complaint be dismissed. 


Findings:- 


[2: 


3. 


4. 


I have given due consideration to the arguments advanced by Sh. R P Rana (AR for workman), Sh. 0 S 
Sidhu (AR for respondent no.!). 


First question which arise for consideration is whether the applicant is workman as defined under 
Section 2(s) of the Act. To my mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(s) of 
the Act. In this regard, reliance can be made to the decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. 
Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 207/ Supreme Court 2532, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court while 
interpreting the provisions of Section 2(s) of the Act which deals with the definition of "workman" has 
observed as under : 


"The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions 
of employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of 
payment are not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman 
within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does 
not make any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person 
appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 
2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or 
a person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed 
on temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee 
or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part 
time or contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in 
that eventuality such a person would be covered by the definition of "workman" as provided in Section 
2(s) of the Act. Thus, nature of appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a "workman" 
within the Act. Since, the workman was engaged on contract basis by respondent no.2 for the work of 
respondent no.|, thus it would be termed as workman under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


Next question which arises for consideration is whether respondent no.| is an industry. The Hon’ble 
Apex Court in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa /9728(36) FLR 
266 dealt at length with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the 
Act, and has laid down triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is industry or not. 
The triple test is where (a) systematic activity (b) organised by cooperation between employer and 
employee (the direct and substantial element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of 
goods and services to calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that 
enterprise. Relevant part of judgment of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra) is 
reproduced as under-- 


“Does research involve collaboration between employer and employee? It does. The 
employer is the institution, the employees are the scientists, para-scientists and other 
personnel. Is scientific research service? Undoubtedly it is. Its discoveries are valuable 
contributions to the wealth of the nation. Such discoveries may be sold for a heavy price 
in the industrial or other markets. Technology has to be plate for and technological 
inventions and innovations may be patented and sold. In our scientific and technological 
age nothing has more cash value, as intangible goods and invaluable services, than 
discoveries. For instance, the discoveries of Thomas Alva Edison made him fabulously 
rich. It has been said that his brain had the highest cash value in history for he made the 
world vibrate with the miraculous discovery of recorded, sound. Unlike most inventors, 
he did not have to wait to get his reward in heaven; he received, it munificently on this 
gratified and grateful earth, thanks to conversion of his inventions into, money a plenty. 
Research benefits industry. Even though a research institute may be a separate entity 
disconnected from the many industries which funded the institute itself, it can be 
regarded as an Organisation, propelled by systematic activity, modeled on co-operation 
between employer and employee and calculated to throw up discoveries and inventions 
and useful solutions which benefit individual industries and the nation in terms of goods 


9226 


5. 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


20. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


and services and wealth. It follows that research institutes, albeit run without profit- 
motive, are industries.” 


In the present case, respondent no.| is doing research work and as per RWI Sh. Shankar Das Rishi, 
products are sold in the institute for display purposes of the products. He has also admitted that vide 
Ex.WI to W7, various products of the institute have been sold to the customers. Thus, respondent no.| 
is engaged in systematic activity organized by cooperation between employer and employee (employees 
being workmen in the present case) for the production or distribution of goods and services to calculated 
to satisfy human wants. In this regard, it is carrying out research. In addition to this, from the research 
work, benefits are being driven by respondent no.! and as per observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in 


Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra), respondent no.| falls under the definition of 
‘industry’ as defined under the Act. 


So far as argument of AR for respondent no.| that respondent no.! being instrumentality of state does 
not fall under the definition of ‘industry’. In this regard, Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Chief 
Conservator of Forest Versus Jagannath Maruti Kondhare (/996 (2) SCT 764), has held that work, 
which was not be regarded as a part of inalienable of inescapable function of the State and which work 
can be well undertaken by a private agency does not require an instrumentality of State, such functions 
of the State fall within the ambit of Industry. Thus, function of doing research and other allied works of 
selling of goods and earning from research cannot be said to be sovereign function of the State and thus 
for this purpose of industrial dispute, respondents would be termed as industry. 


Thus, from every angle, respondent no.| is an industry. Moreover, its employees are not governed by 
IHBT Rules or CCS Rules, thus it is an industry. In view of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court 
titled as Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra), decided by Hon'ble Supreme Court, the 
case law Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and others (supra) decided by Hon'ble 


High Court at Allahabad cited by AR for respondent no.! is not attracted to the facts and circumstances 
of the present case. 


It is also added here that as per definition of contractor as given in the Section 2(c) of the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 (hereinafter called as Contract Act), respondent no.2 was 
supplying contract labour to the respondent no.l!. Thus, he would also fall under the definition of 
contractor. Section 2(c) of the Contract Act is reproduced as under: 


“Contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes to produce 
a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods or articles of 
manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract 
labour for any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor; 


The workman was doing work i.e. systematic activity for respondent no.| at the asking of respondent 
no.2 and there was cooperation between the workman and respondent no.2, which involve substantial 
commercial element for rendering service to satisfy human wants. Thus, as per Banglore Water Supply 
(supra), respondent no.2 would be termed as industry. 


Next question, which arises for consideration is whether there exists relationship of employer and 
employee between respondent no.| and present workman. In this regard, it is pointed out that admittedly 
in this case, union of workmen has filed ID No.255 of 20I3 titled as The General Secretary, Institute of 
Himalayan Bio-Source Technology (CSIR) (supra). It is further pointed out that in order to prove 


relationship of employer and employee i.e. master and servant, the Hon’ble Supreme Court after 
analyzing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air India Limited in Civil 
Appeal ५०. 70266 dated 25.06. 20/4, two well recognized tests to find out whether the labours are the 
contract employees of the principal employer are:- 


3) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 


2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


In this case, admittedly wages were paid by respondent no.2, however, control was of the respondent no.|. 


2I. 


Thus, under these circumstances, it is held that there exist relationship of master and servant between 
respondent no.! and workman. 


Further, in the present case, admittedly respondent no.| is entering into different contract agreements 
with respondent no.2 (.२५७४|/| Colly as detailed above) by retaining same workmen and thus 
contracts are sham in view of the observation of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in similar matter in 


Management of CPWD versus Anand Kumar Gautam and ors. (2024:DHC:2757) which is as under: 


“Contract labourers can be engaged for the work of contractor only and not for the work 
of any establishment. In the present case the work is of the establishment and not of the 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9227 


22. 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26. 


contractor. The term supply of labour by a contractor is against human dignity. No one 
can be a supplier of human labour to any establishment. It is the duty of State to give 
employment to citizen and not of the contractors. Contractors cannot supply labour to any 
establishment. In view of the above discussion it becomes quite obvious that the 
contractors workmen in the instant case have been retained all along and contractors have 
been changed. So the contractor is only a label of a bottle. This label is changed from time 
to time but the contents of the bottle always remain the same. The contractors have been 
changed and the workmen have been retained. Such a system is in-human. The contractors 
are the direct employees of the respondent/management. 


From the foregoing it becomes quite obvious that these two workmen have been working 


regularly and even without artificial breaks since /995-96, The contract is camouflage. 
There _is direct relation of master_and_servant between _the_respondent_and_the 


workmen.” 


Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Bhilwara Dugdh Utpadak Sahakari_S. Ltd. Versus Vinod 
Kumar Sharma dead by LRs and others (AIR 20/। Supreme Court 3546) has held as under:- 


4. In order to avoid their liability under various labour statutes employers are very often 
resorting to subterfuge by trying to show that their employees are in fact, the employees of 
a contractor. It is high time that this subterfuge must come to an end. 


5. Labour statutes were meant to protect the employees/workmen because it was realized 
that the employers and the employees are not on an equal bargaining position. Hence, 
protection of employees was required so that they may not be exploited. However, this new 
technique of subterfuge has been adopted by some employers in recent years in order to 
deny the rights of the workmen under various labour statutes by showing that the 
concerned workmen are not their employees but are the employees/workmen of a 
contractor, or that they are merely daily wage or short term or casual employees when in 
fact they are doing the work of regular employees. 


Thus, from the above observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is clear that respondent no.| has resorted 
to subterfuge by trying to show that workman was employee of respondent no.2. 


Moreover, respondent no.| entered in various agreements with respondent no.2 (-.२५७४७।/| Colly), 
which shows that there is practice that the contract for engagement of the employer/labour through 
contractors changes on the basis of bid of the contractors every year. The contractor may change but the 
employees/labourers always remain same. The workman was already working with the management 
when the contract was tendered to the respondent no.2. Neither the workman was engaged by 
respondent no.2 nor the services of workman were terminated by respondent no.2. It is the respondent 
no.! who uses to select/engage and terminate the labour/workman and respondent no.2 has no role in the 
same. Thus, it shows that the contract was just an eyewash. It is further submitted that contract was 
allotted to respondent no.2 by respondent no.! on different years as per +5.२५४७ |/] (colly) and sometime 
to other contractors, meaning thereby the respondent no.| is controlling authority of the workmen 
including their engagement, termination etc. and even the wages of workman were also decided by 
respondent no.! only and respondent no.2 has no role to play in the same. So, there exist relationship of 
employees/servant and employer/master between the workmen and respondent no.|. Thus, the judgment 
The Joint Secretary, Central Board of Secondary education and another (supra) cited by AR for 
respondent no.| is not attracted to the present case as in this case, time and again, same workers were 
being engaged through contractor and in view of clear cut dictum of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in 


Management of CPWD (supra), the aforementioned case law is not attracted. 
So far as Kirlosker Brothers Ltd. Vs. Ramcharan_and_ others (supra) relied upon by the AR for 


respondent no.l is concerned, facts and circumstances of this case are distinguishable. In the said 
Kirlosker Brothers Ltd. Vs. Ramcharan and others (supra), Court has held that that when there are no 
allegations or findings of sham and bogus contract then the contention of the reinstatement or the 
absorption of the workman cannot be sustained but the facts of the matter at hand is different from the 
facts of the case as in the instant case. In this case, workman was working since long and the work was 
of perennial nature. Thus, it tantamount to unfair labour practice. 


It is added here that admittedly in this case, workman was discharged by the respondent no.| & 2 and as 
per agreement Ex.RWI/I (colly), contract was awarded to respondent no.2 by respondent no.! for a 
period of two years i.e. from 9.2.202 to 8.2.20l4. However, workman was discharged prior to that 
on 28..204. 


9226 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


3l. 


No prior permission was taken by respondent no.| & 2 before the discharging the services of workman. 
Section 33(2)(b) of the Act is very material and the same is reproduced below:- 


“(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, or discharge or punish, whether 
by dismissal or otherwise, that workman: 


Provided that no such workman shall be discharged or dismissed, unless he has 
been paid wages for one month and an application has been made by the employer to the 
authority before which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken by the 
employer.” 


As per aforesaid provision, the workman can be discharged or dismissed after paying one month wages 
and after getting approval of the competent authority. In this case, no wages for one month was paid nor 
any permission from competent authority was taken before discharging the workman and consequently, 
it would be considered that workman was in regular services of the workman. A Full Constitutional 
Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Jaipur Zila Sahakari Bhoomi_Vikas_ Bank Ltd. 
versus Ram Gopal Sharma_and_ others (2002 SCC (L_& S) 279) has held that failure to make 


application for approval of the order of discharge or dismissal or withdrawal of such application after 
making it, held, renders the order of discharge or dismissal void and inoperative. 


The present application under Section 33A is well maintainable and purpose has also been defined by 


the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaipur Zila Sahakari Bhoomi Vikas Bank Ltd. (supra) case, which read 


as follows:- 


Section 33A is available to an employee and is intended to save his time and trouble in as 
much as he can straightway make a complaint before the very authority, where the 
industrial dispute is already pending between the parties, challenging the order of 
approval instead of making efforts to raise an industrial dispute, get a reference and 
thereafter adjudication. Section उतर speaks of penalty in respect of the offences stated 
therein. This provision is not intended to give any remedy to an aggrieved employee. It is 
only to punish the offender. Merely because penal provision is available or a workman has 
a further remedy under Section 33A to challenge the approval granted, it canoe be said 
that the order of discharge or dismissal does not become inoperative or invalid unless set 
aside under Section 33A. 


In view of the above discussion, the termination of workman on 28.!.204 is bad in law and hence is 
set aside. In this case, both the respondents in connivance with each other have dispensed the services of 
the workman. Hence, both respondents are liable. The workman is entitled for reinstatement along with 
full back wages. It is ordered accordingly. The services of the workman would not be 
discharged/terminated during the pendency of the ID No.255 of 20l3, wherein, they have claimed 
various demands vide charter of demands dated 09.05.20l!. However, in case workman has attained the 
age of retirement, then he would be entitled for full back wages along with other consequential benefits 
instead of reinstatement in service. 


Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 47 of the Act 
for publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 744.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारत के नियंत्रक एवं महालेखापरीक्षक; प्रधान महालेखाकार (ऑडिट); महालेखाकार (ए एंड ई) के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री विजय उनियाल के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, 
चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 09/2025) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार 
को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-224-आईआर/(डीयू)| 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9229 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 744.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 09/2025) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Comptloller & Auditor General of India; Principal Accountant General (Audit); Accountant 
General (A&E) and Shri Vijay Uniyal which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-22-(R(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 
(Present:- Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer). 
ID No.09/2025 


Vijay Uniyal S/o Sh. P.D. Uniyal, aged 47 years, R/o House No. 650, Saini Vihar, Phase 3, Distt. Mohali, 
Baltana-40603. 


wannnnn- Workman 
Versus 


l. Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 0, Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi-!!0002. 
(Deleted) 


2. Principal Accountant General (Audit), Punjab, Plot No.20-2, Sector 7, Chandigarh-!6007. 
3. Accountant General (A&E), Punjab, Sector |7, Chandigarh-6007. 


------ Respondents 
Present:- Sh. Jagdeep Jaswal, AR for workman. 


Sh. Barjesh Mittal, AR for respondent no.! to 3. 


AWARD : 22.04.2026 


l. Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana vide order dated 9.05.2025 passed in CWP No.26760 of 209 
titled as Bhag Singh and others versus Comptroller and Auditor General of India and others has referred this 
matter under Section I0A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter called the Act) to this Tribunal 
observing that if applicant challenge his termination, the question of limitation shall not be gone into and the 
Labour Court/Industrial Court shall examine their grievance in terms of Section l0A of the Act by taking 
dispute directly. It is also made clear that the dismissal of appeal by the Central Administrative Tribunal shall 
not come in the way. It is under these circumstances, the present petition has been filed by the workman 
challenging his oral termination dated 02.05.207. 


2: Brief facts of the case, as per claim statement of workman, are that the workman was employed as Casual 
Labourer by the Respondent No.3 against the regular sanction post w.e.f. 0!.02.2007 and has been 
continuously working till 02.05.207. Workman worked with the management continuously and completed 
more than 240 days in the year 206 and 207. He has also worked 240 days preceding one year from the date 
of his termination on 02.05.207. 


3. Workman was engaged on the sanctioned posts through legal process and worked for more than 0 years, but 
he was not granted temporary status despite of the instructions issued by Government of India dated 
0.09.993 on the ground that the said scheme was only for one time. 


4. As per the information received by the workman, still 28 posts of MTS are vacant in the office of respondent 
No.3 against which, the workman was continuously working. Management outsourced the work of the 
workman and removed the workman from his work. The respondent No.2 has ordered verbally not to report 
for work on 02.05.207, without giving any notice in writing. The workman orally requested the respondents 
to regularize his services also in accordance with the rules and at par with the other Casual Labourers who has 
been regularized or given temporary status. But instead of regularizing the services of the workman, the 
respondent no.! has outsourced the services through some contractors. 


5. Services of workman were dispensed with whereas, his juniors were retained in service, which was in violation 
of Section 25H of the Act. It is further maintained that no compensation was given to the workman, which is in 


9230 


0. 


Il. 


2. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


violation of Section 25F of the Act. Workman was eligible for regularization of his service as 28 posts of MTS 
are lying vacant in the office of respondent no.3. Workman filed OA No.60/470/207 dated 02.05.20]7 in 
Hon'ble Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh (hereinafter called as CAT Chandigarh) and vide order 
dated 03.05.207, Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh directed the respondent to allow the workman and others to 
continue till !2.05.20I7. The said OA was finally dismissed on 23.04.209. Applicant also filed review 
application, which was also dismissed on 22.08.209. Workman challenged the said order before the Hon'ble 
High Court by filing CWP No.26760/209 and the matter was relegated to this Tribunal by the High Court. 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Jaggo V/s Union of India and others (2024 INSC 7034) held that 


termination of casual employees working since long is unfair and they are to be regularized. 


It is maintained that the work performed by the workman is of perennial in nature. It is prayed that claim of the 
workman may be allowed and oral termination dated 02.05.20l7 may be declared illegal and arbitrary and 
workman be reinstated back in service and deemed to be in service with all consequential benefits and be also 
held entitled for full back wages from the date of his termination. 


Notice of petition was given to the respondents, who filed reply thereof maintaining therein that the workman 
was engaged as casual worker for performing work on seasonal basis as per need and requirement of work by 
office of respondent No.2 w.e.f. 2007 and performed duty for a period of 98 days upto 25.0.20l! on 
intermittent basis. As per office records the payment to casual workers including the workman was being made 
through Contingent Bill Register (2009-200) under the Head "Wages' and the name of the workman finds 
mentioned at Serial No.24 therein. The GOI DOPT OM dated 0.09.993 providing for temporary 
status/regularization categorically provided for conferment of temporary status on all casual labourers who 
were in employment on the date of issue of OM and who have rendered a continuous service of at least one 
year i.e. engaged for a period of 240 days. The workman has never completed a period of 240 days. The 
workman is himself admitting to having been engaged in 2007 does not get covered under the said scheme 
which was only for those casual labourers who were in employment on the date of issue of OM i.e. 
0.09.993. Hence, the submissions regarding grant of temporary status to the Workman is misconceived. 
Moreover, in the previous litigations filed by the Workman before Hon'ble CAT Chandigarh Bench, the said 
relief of temporary/regularization was never sought/pleaded by the Workman and earlier stage also. 


The regular post of MTS, if vacant/available, with the department shall be filled up on direct recruitment basis 
to be conducted by SSC as per provisions of relevant Recruitment Rules. At earlier point of time, in pursuance 
to advertisement dated 24.09.20 for filling up the post of MTS on direct recruitment basis, the application of 
workman belonging to General Category was duly considered and he was granted all the admissible 
relaxations of age, period of his engagement as casual labourer etc. However, since he was overage by more 
than 0l year 06 months and 29 days, even after grant of all admissible relaxation, his application was rejected 
on account of being overage. The Workman assailed the said rejection of his candidature with respect to direct 
recruitment by filing OA No.54/CH/20i3 decided on 0.02.204 before Hon'ble CAT Chandigarh which 
stood dismissed. 


On the basis of recommendations of 6" CPC to the effect that Govt. is required to outsource certain activities 
by providing employment in the form of contract labour and the said outsourcing would be discontinued when 
the regular incumbents joined and the CAG Headquarter office in February-March 207 had not considered 
the funds/budget for making payment of wages/disbursement of salary to directly engaged daily wagers. Since 
there was no scheme for regularization of services except for granting adequate relaxation for the period of his 
engagement as Casual Labourer w.e.f. 0!.02.2007 to 25.0.20l] as well as other admissible relaxations, prior 
to filling up the post of MTS through direct recruitment, the service of workman could not have been 
regularized and neither he could have been conferred with temporary status under the scheme being not in 
employment during 993. 


Workman is making contradictory statement in his claim statement. He is contending that his services have 
been orally terminated w.e.f. 02.05.207 and further he is also contending that he was replaced by other 
individuals during 203-204. The non-assailing of his replacement by other individuals at the relevant time in 
203-204 under the relevant provisions of the Act and availing his remedies before Ld. CAT and thereafter, 
before Hon'ble High Court makes the present claim statement time barred by limitation by calculating the 
period from 203-204 respectively. 


The workman himself sought discharge from services vide his application dated 0.08.204. Had the letter 
dated 0.08.204 being fabricated document, the workman could have availed his legal remedies to prove the 
said letter as fabricated one from competent court of law and neither any said contention was raised by him at 
earlier point of time by making submissions qua the same in cases filed by workman before Hon'ble CAT/High 
Court of Punjab and Haryana. 


Further, there is no scheme of regularization in the management department and the available post of MTS 
shall be filled up on the basis of open competition/direct recruitment to be conducted by SSC strictly in terms 
of Statutory Recruitment Rules for the post of MTS. 


3. 


4. 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 923[ 


Workman has already availed his remedies after his disengagement by filing appropriate cases before Hon'ble 
CAT Chandigarh Bench as well as Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court and the present claim statement 
filed by the Workman being misconceived and against the relevant provisions of rules and law, deserves to be 
dismissed outrightly in the interest of justice. 


It is added here that AR for respondents moved an application for dropping the name of respondent no.| from 
the array of parties for the reasons mentioned in the application and AR for workman gave no objection and 
application was allowed. However, in this case, all the respondents have jointly filed written statement. 
Respondent no.! is the controlling authority of respondent no.2 & 3 and thus was a formal party. 


Evidence of workman:- 


5. 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as WWI and tendered into evidence his affidavit 
Ex.WWI/A and has been cross examined by the AR for respondents. AR for workman closed the evidence on 
5.04.2026. 


List of documents:- 


Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit/Mark 
l. Letter Ex.WWI/I 
2. Work report 23.0.203 Mark A 
3. Letter 7.03.207 Mark B 
4. Letter 29.03.207 Mark C 
5. Letter 0.04.207 Mark D 
|. | Letter 3.04.207 Mark E 
7. Letter 25.04.207 Mark F 
| 5 | हे Order of Hon'ble CAT 03.05.207 Mark G 
| _? | Order of Hon'ble High Court 9.05.2025 Mark H 
0. Summary of working days Mark I 


Evidence of respondents:- 


6. 


Respondent no.l & 2 has examined Sh. Varinder Singh Saini, Assistant Account Officer, who tendered into 
evidence his affidavit ०७७॥/३७ and has been cross examined by AR for workman. AR for respondents closed 
the evidence on 2.04.2026. 


List of documents of respondents:- 


Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit/Mark 
l. Details of litigations Mark A 
Ds Order of Hon'ble CAT 0.02.204 Mark B 
3. Order of Hon'ble CAT 23.04.209 Mark C 
4. Order of Hon'ble CAT 22.08.209 Mark D 
5. Work report 23.0.203 Mark F 


Submissions of workman:- 


7. 


While arguing the case, ld. counsel for workman contended that in this case, workman was engaged as casual 
labour by the respondent on regular sanctioned post w.e.f. 0.02.2007 and was continuously worked till 
02.05.207 for more than !0 years and was terminated verbally on 02.05.20I7. Workman had completed 240 
days preceding the year of his termination on 02.05.207. Against the verbal termination order, workman 
along with other workmen had gone in Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh in OA No. 60/470/207 challenging the 
termination order and had also sought regularization, which was dismissed by the Hon'ble CAT, Chandigarh. 
Thereafter, workman went in High Court and High Court vide order dated 9.05.2025 has relegated the matter 
to this Tribunal. He further contended that since this Tribunal has been directed to dispose of the case in terms 
of Section L0A of the Act. In this case workman had completed 240 days preceding the year of his termination 
i.e. 02.05.207, however, no compensation was given to him and there was violation of Section 25F of the Act. 
Hence, he prayed that workman may be reinstated with back wages and all consequential benefits. 


9232 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Submissions of respondents:- 


8. On the other hand, Id. counsel for respondents contended that in this case, workman was removed from service 
due to non sending of wages under wages head by the head office of respondent no.l.Instructions were also 
received from the Government of India that no direct appointment be made of casual employees and they may 
be engaged through contractors. Moreover, the workman was gainfully employed after his termination. As per 
order of Hon'ble High Court dated !9.05.2025 passed in CWP No.26760 of 209, this Tribunal is not 
competent to decide this matter. 


Findings:- 
9. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by AR for both the parties. 


20. The first contention regarding the claimant is that whether he comes within the definition of ‘workman’ as is 
defined in Section 2(s) of the Act. I may mention that claimant was working as casual labour as per his claim 
petition and affidavit submitted before the Tribunal. In plain words the claimant was performing his duties as 
labourer/unskilled worker. He was not in supervisory or administrative post requiring him to perform only 
administrative duties. While interpreting Section 2(s) Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Devinder Singh 
Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20I] Supreme Court 2532, has observed as follows:- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment 
are not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the 
meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make 
any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on 
contract basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it 
can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for 
doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or 
contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed 
hours is not a workman.” 


2l. | Thus, Hon’ble Supreme Court has clarified that the definition of workman also does not make any distinction 
between full time or part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in plain 
language of Section 2(s) from which it can be infer that only person employed on regular basis or a person 
employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman. In view of the 
ratio of law enunciated in the above ruling, in my considered opinion the claimant herein admittedly falls 
within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


22. Next question which arises for consideration is whether respondents are an industry. The Hon’ble Apex Court 
in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa /978(36) FLR 266 dealt at length 
with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act, and has laid down 
triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is industry or not. The triple test is where (a) 
systematic activity (b) organised by cooperation between employer and employee (the direct and substantial 
element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of goods and services to calculated to satisfy 
human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that enterprise. To support this view, reliance can be 


placed on Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra). 


23. In the present case, respondent is a government body and is engaged in systematic activity organized by 
cooperation between employer and employee (employee being workman in the present case) and is covered 
under the Act. 


24. Further, Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Chief Conservator of Forest Versus Jagannath Maruti 
Kondhare (7०996 (2) SCT 264), has held that work, which was not be regarded as a part of inalienable of 


inescapable function of the State and which work can be well undertaken by a private agency does not require 
an instrumentality of State, such functions of the State fall within the ambit of Industry. Thus, function being 
done by the respondents cannot be said to be sovereign function of the State and thus for this purpose of 
industrial dispute, respondent would be termed as industry. Thus, respondents are industries for the purpose 
they were engaging casual labour and thus functions cannot be said to be sovereign function of State. 


25. So far as this argument of Ld. counsel for respondents that this Tribunal is incompetent to entertain the ID case 
under Section I0A of the Act. In this regard, it is pointed out that High Court vide its order dated 9.05.2025 
passed in CWP No.26760 of 209 has directed as under:- 


If the writ petitioners challenge their termination, question of limitation shall not be gone into, and 
the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall examine their grievances in terms of Section l0A of the 


26. 


27. 


26. 


29. 


30. 


[भाग त]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9233 


Act, by taking up the dispute directly. If such an application is filed by the petitioners within period 
of one month, the Labour Court/Industrial Court shall attempt to decide the same expeditiously, 
preferably within a period of one month from today. It is made clear that the dismissal of appeal by 
the Central Administrative Tribunal shall not come in their way. 


Further, Section 0A of the Act read as follows:- 


Voluntary reference of disputes to arbitration.—(I) Where any industrial dispute exists or 
is apprehended and the employer and the workmen agree to refer the dispute to 
arbitration, they may, at any time before the dispute has been referred under section 79 to 
a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal, by a written agreement, refer the 
dispute to arbitration and the reference shall be to such person or persons (including the 
presiding officer of a Labour Court or Tribunal or National Tribunal) as an arbitrator or 
arbitrators as may be specified in the arbitration agreement. 


From co-joint reading of Section l0A of the Act and order of High Court dated 9.05.2025, it emerges 
that High Court has referred this matter for adjudicating as arbitrator with the consent of both the parties. 
Hence, the application under Section I0A is very much maintainable before this Tribunal. 


Next question is whether the workman has completed 240 days preceding one year from the date of his 
termination on 02.05.207. In this regard, it is pertinent to mention here that the workman has placed on 
record, vide which he has worked 270 days prior to 02.05.20l7 as per attendance register ( 5.४४०७।/।) and 
summary of working days (Mark I) for the period May 206 to May 207. Even attendance register is on the 
file. Hence, the workman is able to prove that he has worked for about 270 days preceding one year prior to his 
termination on 02.05.207. There is thus violation of Section 25F of the Act, which read as follows:- 


Conditions precedent _to_retrenchment_of workmen.—No workman employed in any 


industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer 
shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the workman has been given one month’s notice in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu of 
such notice, wages for the period of the notice; 


(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service or 
any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such 
authority as may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official 
Gazette. 


Since in this case, applicant is workman as defined under the Act and was removed from service without 
compliance of the Section 25F of the Act, which provide payment of retrenchment compensation as well as 
wages in lieu of notice for the period of notice. Thus, due to breach of Section 25F of the Act, workman is 
entitled for reinstatement. So far as violation of Section 25G and 25H is concerned, no evidence is given by the 
workman regarding violation of Section 25G and 25H of the Act. Hence, it is deemed that applicant has failed 
to prove violations of Sections 25G and 25H of the Act. 


Under these circumstances, the workman is reinstated into service. But so far as back wages are concerned, 
workman was though working as labourer on daily wages intermittently as and when available and cannot be 
said completely gainfully employed. Hence, he is entitled for 70% back wages. However, it is made clear that 
in view of the instructions of Government of India that no casual employee can be taken directly by the 
respondents, workman would continue to work with the respondents through contractor till attaining age of his 
superannuation/retirement, even if contractor is changed as it is specific case of the workman in his application 
before this Tribunal that work assigned to him is of perennial nature and there is no denial of this fact by the 
respondents. 


As regards regularization of workman, no prayer is made by the AR for workman nor it was argued by the AR 
for workman how the workman was entitled for regularization of his services. 


Let copy of this award be sent to Central Government for publication as required under Section 7 of the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


9234 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 745.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पावर ग्रिड कॉर्पोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया लिमिटेड; बलविंदर कुमार सैनी, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रिंकू कुमार के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 
58/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-249-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


9.0. 745.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 58/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Power Grid Cooperation of India Ltd; Balwinder Kumar Saini and Shri Rinku Kumar which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[F. No. L-42025/07/2026-29-(R(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 
(Presided over by Mr. Kamal Kant). 


ID No.58/2020 
Rinku Kumar S/o Sh. Suresh Pal R/o Gandhi Nagar, Tehsil Indri, District Karnal (Haryana). 
waannnn- Workman 
Versus 


l. The General manager, Power Grid Cooperation of India Ltd. 800 KV West North, Interconnector, HVDC 
Project, House no.56, Sector 2, Near OP Jindal Chowk, Kurukshetra, District Kurukshetra (Haryana) 


2. Balwinder Kumar Saini, Government Contractor & Supplier, 50-E, Street No.4, Partap Nagar, Patiala, District 
Patiala. 


----Respondents 


Present:- Sh. Ashok Kumar, AR for workman. 
Respondent no.| & 2 already ex parte. 


Award : 03.06.2026 


l. The workman has filed the present claim statement directly under Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 (hereinafter called as ID Act) against his termination dated 8.09.208 claiming reinstatement in service 
with full back wages, continuity of service and all consequential benefits. 


2. Brief facts of the case as per claim statement filed by the workman are that the workman was appointed as 
Mali (Gardener) for the work of Horticulture maintenance by respondent no.l through the contractor Arun 
Tyagi on 22.04.20I5 at the monthly wages of Rs.9000/- per month after deduction of ESI and PF etc. 
Thereafter, the contract of the horticulture maintenance work was awarded to the respondent no.2 from 
30.03.206 to 5.05.20l8 for two years and still respondent no.2 is having contract of work of horticulture 
maintenance with respondent no.l. The workman remained in service till !8.09.208 and his last wages were 
Rs.l0345/- after deductions. But the respondents paid only Rs.899I/- per month and due to this reason, the 
workman objected the illegal deduction of salary and he made complaint to the GM and DGM and concerned 
Incharge JE and they threatened him to terminate his services. Aggrieved by this, the workman along with 
other workmen made a complaint in writing to the Labour Inspector and Labour Inspector made inspection on 
the complaint. At this, respondents started to harass the workman ultimately, illegally terminate his services on 
8.09.208 by verbal order. He was not paid minimum wages as fixed by the Central Government from time to 
time for the post of Mali (gardener) as skilled worker. 


3. 


0. 


Il. 


2. 


3. 


4. 


5. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9235 


Aggrieved by order of termination, the workman filed a demand notice with Assistant Labour Commissioner 
(Central), Labour Department Central Government, Karnal (hereinafter called as ALC Karnal) on 26.09.20]8. 
However, the conciliation proceedings failed and ALC Karnal issued a certificate to enable the workman to 
approach this Tribunal. 


The workman along with other workers filed CWP No.35459 of 209 titled as “Sanjay Kumar and others V/s 
General Manager, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. and another” before the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana 
High Court and the same was disposed of with the liberty to approach the Labour Court vide order dated 
2.0I.2020. 


No charge sheet or inquiry or any notice before termination of services of the workman was ever served upon 
the workman. No permission from Government was obtained for termination of services of the workman. 
Before filing the demand notice, the workman requested many times for reinstatement into service, but all in 
vain. 


The workman had worked more than 240 days in a year and his services have been terminated without 
following the procedure prescribed under Section 25G, 25H and 25F of the Act. Many juniors to the workman 
have been appointed by the respondents and even fresh appointments have been made by the respondents on 
low wages, which is unfair labour practice. The workman is not gainfully employed after termination of his 
services on 8.09.208. 


The respondents have not issued any appointment letter, attendance slip, ESI card or any other document. 
Neither the principal employer i.e. respondent no.! has obtained license under Section 7 of the Abolition of 
Labour Contract Act nor the contractor i.e. respondent no.2 is registered under Section 2 with the Central 
Labour Department. Therefore, mode of payment is a mere camouflage just to deprive the workman from his 
legal rights regarding regularization of the services with respondent no.!. No record has been maintained by 
the respondent no.! or respondent no.2 as per requirement of Section 29 of Contract Act. It is maintained that 
the termination of workman w.e.f. 8.09.208 is illegal and it is prayed that the workman may be reinstated in 
service with full back wages, continuity of service and all consequential benefits. 


Notice of the claim petition was given to the respondents. 


Respondent no.! filed reply to the claim petition maintaining therein that the workman was never appointed by 
answering respondent. Respondent no.! had awarded contract to respondent no.2 vide LOA dated 30.03.206 
(Maintenance of Horticulture work around the transit camp at 800 KV HVDC terminal at Kurukshetra) for the 
duration of two years, further, one year extension and the said contract had expired with efflux of time and no 
extension was granted. Thereafter, through detailed tendering process, the contract was again awarded to 
respondent no.2 vide LOA dated 5.05.208 for another two years with provision of one year extension. The 
said contract expired in the month of May 202]. 


There is no employer employee relationship between workman and respondent no.! as workmen was deployed 
by contractor as per the provision of Contract and he is employee of the contractor, not of the respondent no. 


Respondent no.! vide letter dated 2.09.20I8 addressed to respondent no.2, brought the shortcomings of 
horticulture work in his attention by specifically pointing out that the manpower engaged/deployed by him i.e. 
engaged Mali don't have the proper horticulture knowledge and advised respondent no 2 to improve the 
shortcomings. 


The services of the workman were never terminated by respondent no.| and due minimum wages were paid to 
him as per the relevant provisions of contract in line with applicable laws. 


The workman was contract labour for respondent no.l] and never remained a direct employee of respondent 
no.l. Further, the workman was under the direct supervision and control of respondent No.2 and salary to him 
was being paid by respondent No.2. Therefore, question of violation of Section 25 F, 25 G and 25 H of the Act 
does not arise qua respondent no.| as no industrial dispute exists between the workman and respondent no. |. 


Respondent no.! has duly registered its establishment u/s 7 of Contract Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act 
970 and proper records have been maintained as per the statutory requirement of Section 29 of the said Act. 
Being a central public sector enterprise, respondent no.| always abides the labour compliance within the time 
bound manner. It is prayed that the claim statement may be dismissed qua respondent no.|. 


Respondent no.2 also filed reply thereof maintaining therein that contract for the work "Maintenance of 
Horticulture work around Transit Camp at 800 KV Terminal, Kurukshetra" for a period of 2 years with a 
provision of further one year extension, was awarded through tendering process to respondent no.2 by 
respondent No.l vide its letter dated 3!.03.20l6 and the contract period of this work was closed on 
5.05.20i8. Thereafter new tender bid was opened on 9.04.20I8 and further Contract for a period of 2 years 
with one year extension provision was awarded by respondent no.| vide its letter dated 5.05.20I8 i.e. up to 


9236 


6. 


7. 


8. 


9. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


5.05.2020 and as per the terms of contract, it was extended for one year i.e. till 5.05.202!. Respondent No.2 
has no work after the date of expiry of said extension with respondent no.|. 


Work and conduct of workman was poor and insolent. The workman abdicated his work many a times and in 
view of this, respondent no.l, whose work was severally affected due to his deplorable and unsatisfactory 
performance, addressed a letter dated 2.09.20l8 to respondent no.2 and thereupon immediately, workman 
was called to make amends in his duties and do the work in disciplined way, however, workman started 
misbehaving and threatening. Taking into account the consistent misbehaving and insolent attitude of working, 
respondent no.2 had no option, except to discontinue the services of workman. His termination was made 
purely for unsatisfactory performance of duties workman. 


Due minimum wages were paid to the workman as per the relevant provisions of law and contract. The 
workman has deliberately approached the Hon'ble High Court just to cause delay and harass respondent no.?2, 
despite the clear and precise direction of conciliation officer on dated 06.2.20l8 to approach the Central 
Government industrial cum Labour Court. 


The provisions of Contract Act are not applicable to respondent no.2, which mandates the issuance of 
appointment letter and attendance slip. It is submitted that there is no violation of Section 25F, 25G and 25H of 
the Act and it is prayed that the claim statement of workman may be dismissed with cost qua respondent no.2. 


Rejoinder was also filed on behalf of workman rebutting the facts of written statement. 


Evidence of parties:- 


20. 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as मै] and tendered into evidence his affidavit 
Ex.WI/A and has been cross examined by the AR for respondent no.!. AR for workman closed the evidence 
on 23.08.2024. 


Documents relied upon by the workman:- 


2I. 


22. 


Sr. No. Document [Date िइिंंंी Ex. 

i Letter 0.04.206 Wi/l 
2. Detail of manpower 0.04.206 Wi/2 
3. Letter to Govt. Contractor 2.09.208 १४।/३ 
4. List of worker submitted by १४॥/4 

contractor 

5 Request by workman 27.04.209 WI/5 
6 | Request by workman to DC Karnal ५४/6 
7. Request to SDM Indri, Karnal 8.09.208 WiI/7 
Be | Reply 3.0.208 ५४ ।/8 
| Reply 3.0.208 WI/9 
0. Demand Notice 25.04.209 WI/0 
Il. Copy of Postal receipt Wi/il 
2. Certificate issued by respondent no.2_ | 27.08.208 Wi/i2 


It is pertinent to mention here that the respondent no.! & 2 was proceeded ex parte on !3.0.2025 and the case 
was fixed for ex parte arguments. 


I have heard Id. counsel for the workman and given due consideration to the arguments raised by the ld. 
counsel for workman. 


Findings:- 


23. 


The first contention regarding the applicant is that whether applicant comes within the definition of workman 
as is defined in Section 2(s) of the Act. I may mention that applicant was appointed as Mali (gardner) as per his 
claim petition and affidavit submitted before the Tribunal. In plain words the applicant was performing his 
duties as labourer/unskilled worker. He was not in supervisory or administrative post requiring him to perform 
only administrative duties. While interpreting Section 2(s) Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Devinder 


Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20] Supreme Court 2532, has observed as follows:- 


24. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


[भाग Il—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9237 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are 
not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the 
meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make any 
distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract 
basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be 
inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for doing 
whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a 
workman.” 


Thus Hon’ble Supreme Court has clarified that the definition of workman also does not make any distinction 
between full time or part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in plain 
language of Section 2(s) from which it can be infer that only person employed on regular basis or a person 
employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman. In view of the 
ratio of law enunciated in the above ruling, in my considered opinion the applicant herein admittedly falls 
within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analyzing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal No.l0266 dated 25.08.20i4, two well recognized tests to find out whether the 
labours are the contract employees of the principal employer are:- 


3) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


As regard the payment of salary to the workman, workman in his affidavit has mentioned that his salary was 
paid by the contractor i.e. respondent no.2. Hence, it emerges that workman was paid salary by the contractor 
and he was being controlled and supervised by the contractor. Thus, there does not exist any relationship of 
employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.l. However, there exists relation of 
employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.2. 


It is also added here that as per definition of contractor as given in the Section 2(c) of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 (hereinafter called as Contract Act), respondent no.2 was supplying 
contract labour to the respondent no.!. Thus, respondent no.2 would fall under the definition of contractor. 
Section 2(c) of the Contract Act is reproduced as under: 


“Contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes to 
produce a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods or 
articles of manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies 
contract labour for any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor; 


The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa /9०780(36) 
FLR 266 dealt at length with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the 


Act, and has laid down triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is industry or not. The 
triple test is where (a) systematic activity (b) organized by cooperation between employer and employee (the 
direct and substantial element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of goods and services to 
calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that enterprise. The workman was 
doing work i.e. systematic activity for respondent no.| at the asking of respondent no.2 and there was 
cooperation between the workman and respondent no.2, which involve substantial commercial element for 
rendering service to satisfy human wants. Thus, respondent no.2 would be termed as industry. 


Workman in his affidavit has clearly stated that there was non-compliance of Section 25F, 25G and 25H of the 
Act. He also stated that he was appointed on 22.04.20I5 and was working with respondent no.! through 
contractor. He was not given any compensation before terminating his services on 8.09.20I8. During the 
cross examination, workman has stated that he cannot produce the account statement. But he has placed on 
record certificate issued by respondent no.2, in which it is clearly mentioned that the workman was working 
with it from 0.04.206 till 5.05.208 and the monthly salary of workman was ६. 4,476/- In Thus, workman 
was employee of respondent no.2. There does not exist any relationship of employee and employer between 
the workman and respondent no.l. However, there exists relation of employee and employer between the 
workman and respondent no.2. 


9238 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


30. Admittedly, there is non-compliance of Section 25F of the Act by respondent no.2. However, as regards 
violation of other provisions i.e. Section 25G and 25H of the Act, there is no evidence lead by the workman. 
Hence, workman is entitled for compensation from respondent no.2. 


3l. So keeping in view the tenure of service rendered by the workman i.e. more than 3 years and salary given to 
him during the period of his stay with the contractor and non-compliance of Section 25F of the Act, this 
Tribunal is of the considered opinion that workman is entitled for compensation. 


32. Present workman employed on 22.04.20I5 and was terminated on 8.09.208 (more than 3 years), so he is 
entitled as per law titled as Hemant Babruvahan Parchake versus Social Welfare Officer, Somalwar 


Bhavan, Mount Road, Sadar, Nagpur and others AIR 202] BOM 760, wherein for 8 months, a sum of 
Rs.25,000/- was granted as compensation, workman is granted for Rs.50,000/-. Respondent no.2 is directed to 


pay the workman Rs.50,000/- within one month from the date of the notification of the award failing which the 
respondent no.2 shall further pay interest @6% per annum from the date of award till the date of making 
payment. 


33. Let copy of this award be sent to Central Government for publication as required under Section 7 of the Act. 
KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 746.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पावर ग्रिड कॉर्पोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया लिमिटेड; बलविंदर कुमार सैनी, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री सुनील कुमार 
के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2, चंडीगढ़, Tare (रिफरेन्स न.- 
56/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-248-आईआर(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 746.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 56/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Power Grid Cooperation of India Ltd; Balwinder Kumar Saini and Shri Sunil Kumar which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-28-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 
(Presided over by Mr. Kamal Kant). 
ID No.56/2020 
Sunil Kumar S/o Sh. Sardara Ram, R/o Village Gandhi Nagar, Tehsil Indri, District Karnal (Haryana). 
waannnn- Workman 
Versus 


l. The General manager, Power Grid Cooperation of India Ltd. 800 KV West North, 
Interconnector, HVDC Project, House No.56l, Sector 2, Near OP Jindal Chowk, Kurukshetra, 
District Kurukshetra (Haryana). 


2. Balwinder Kumar Saini, Government Contractor & Supplier, 50-E, Street No.4, Partap Nagar, 
Patiala, Distt. Patiala. 


----Respondents 
Present:- Sh. Ashok Kumar, AR for workman. 


Respondent no.| & 2 already ex parte. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9239 


. 


AWARD : 03.06.2026 


The workman has filed the present claim statement directly under Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (hereinafter called as ID Act) against his termination dated !8.09.208 claiming reinstatement 
in service with full back wages, continuity of service and all consequential benefits. 


Brief facts of the case as per claim statement filed by the workman are that the workman was appointed 
as Mali (Gardener) for the work of Horticulture maintenance by respondent no.! through the contractor 
Arun Tyagi on 22.04.205 at the monthly wages of २६.।2000/- per month after deduction of ESI and PF 
etc. Thereafter, the contract of the horticulture maintenance work was awarded to the respondent no.2 
from 30.03.20l6 to 5.05.20l8 for two years and still respondent no.2 is having contract of work of 
horticulture maintenance with respondent no.l. The workman remained in service till !8.09.20i8 and 
his last wages were 7२६.303 |/- after deductions. But the respondents paid only Rs.l0300/- per month 
and due to this reason, the workman objected the illegal deduction of salary and he made complaint to 
the GM and DGM and concerned incharge JE and they threatened him to terminate his services. 
Aggrieved by this, the workman along with other workmen made a complaint in writing to the Labour 
Inspector and Labour Inspector made inspection on the complaint. At this, respondents started to harass 
the workman ultimately, illegally terminate his services on 8.09.208 by verbal order. He was not paid 
minimum wages as fixed by the Central Government from time to time for the post of Mali (gardener) 
as skilled worker. 


Aggrieved by order of termination, the workman filed a demand notice with Assistant Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Labour Department Central Government, Karnal (hereinafter called as ALC 
Karnal) on 26.09.208. However, the conciliation proceedings failed and ALC Karnal issued a 
certificate to enable the workman to approach this Tribunal. 


The workman along with other workers filed CWP No.35459 of 209 titled as Sanjay Kumar and others 
V/s General Manager, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. and another before the Hon'ble Punjab & 
Haryana High Court and the same was dispose of with the liberty to approach the Labour Court vide 
order dated 2.0.2020. 


No charge sheet or inquiry or any notice before termination of services of the workman was ever served 
upon the workman. No permission from Government was obtained for termination of services of the 
workman. Before filing the demand notice, the workman requested many times for reinstatement into 
service, but all in vain. 


The workman had worked more than 240 days in a year and his services have been terminated without 
following the procedure prescribed under Section 25G, 25H and 25F of the Act. Many juniors to the 
workman have been appointed by the respondents and even fresh appointments have been made by the 
respondents on low wages, which is unfair labour practice. The workman is not gainfully employed after 
termination of his services on 8.09.208. 


The respondents have not issued any appointment letter, attendance slip, ESI card or any other 
document. Neither the principal employer i.e. respondent no.! has obtained license under Section 7 of 
the Abolition of Labour Contract Act nor the contractor i.e. respondent no.2 is registered under Section 
2 with the Central Labour Department. Therefore, mode of payment is a mere camouflage just to 
deprive the workman from his legal rights regarding regularization of the services with respondent no.|. 
No record has been maintained by the respondent no.! or respondent no.2 as per requirement of Section 
29 of Contract Act. It is maintained that the termination of workman w.e.f. 8.09.208 is illegal and it is 
prayed that the workman may be reinstated in service with full back wages, continuity of service and all 
consequential benefits. 


Notice of the claim petition was given to the respondents. 


Respondent no.| filed reply to the claim petition maintaining therein that the workman was never 
appointed by answering respondent. Respondent no.! had awarded contract to respondent no.2 vide 
LOA dated 30.03.20l6 (Maintenance of Horticulture work around the transit camp at 800 KV HVDC 
terminal at Kurukshetra) for the duration of two years, further, one year extension and the said contract 
had expired with efflux of time and no extension was granted. Thereafter, through detailed tendering 
process, the contract was again awarded to respondent no.2 vide LOA dated I5.05.208 for another two 
years with provision of one year extension. The said contract expired in the month of May 202. 


There is no employer employee relationship between workman and respondent no.l as workmen was 
deployed by contractor as per the provision of Contract and he is employee of the contractor, not of the 
respondent no. 


9240 


9. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Respondent no.! vide letter dated !2.09.20i8 addressed to respondent no.2, brought the shortcoming of 
horticulture work in his attention by specifically pointing out that the manpower engaged/deployed by 
him i.e. engaged mali don't have the proper horticulture knowledge and advised respondent no 2 to 
improve the shortcomings. 


The services of the workman were never terminated by respondent no.] and due minimum wages were 
paid to him as per the relevant provisions of contract in line with applicable laws. 


The workman was contract labour for respondent no.! and was never remained a direct employee of 
respondent no.l. Further, the workman was under the direct supervision and control of respondent No.2 
and salary to him was being paid by respondent No.2. Therefore, question of violation of Section 25 F, 
25 G and 25 H of the Act does not arise qua respondent no.! as no industrial dispute exists between the 
workman and respondent no.!. 


Respondent no.! has duly registered its establishment u/s 7 of Contract Labour Regulation and 
Abolition) Act 970 and proper records have been maintained as per the statutory requirement of 
Section 29 of the said Act. Being a central public sector enterprise, respondent no.! always abides the 
labour compliance within the time bound manner. It is prayed that the claim statement may be dismissed 
qua respondent no.. 


Respondent no.2 also filed reply thereof maintaining therein that contract for the work "Maintenance of 
Horticulture work around Transit Camp at 800 KV Terminal, Kurukshetra" for a period of 2 years with a 
provision of further one year extension, was awarded through tendering process to respondent no.2 by 
respondent No.| vide its letter dated 3!.03.206 and the contract period of this work was closed on 
5.05.20i8. Thereafter new tender bid was opened on !9.04.208 and further Contract for a period of 2 
years with one year extension provision was awarded by respondent no.! vide its letter dated 5.05.208 
ie. upto I5.05.2020 and as per the terms of contract, it was extended for one year ice. till 5.05.202]. 
Respondent No.2 have no work after the date of expiry of said extension with respondent no.|. 


Work and conduct of workman was poor and insolent. The workman abdicated his work many a times 
and in view of this, respondent no.l, whose work was severally affected due to his deplorable and 
unsatisfactory performance, addressed a letter dated 2.09.20l8 to respondent no.2 and thereupon 
immediately, workman was called to make amends in his duties and do the work in disciplined way, 
however, workman started misbehaving and threatening. Taking into account the consistent 
misbehaving and insolent attitude of working, respondent no.2 had no option, except to discontinue the 
services of workman. His termination was made purely for unsatisfactory performance of duties 
workman. 


Due minimum wages were paid to the workman as per the relevant provisions of law and contract. The 
workman has deliberately approached the Hon'ble High Court just to cause delay and harass respondent 
no.2, despite the clear and precise direction of conciliation officer on dated 06.2.208 to approach the 
Central Government industrial cum labour court. 


The provisions of Contract Act are not applicable to respondent no.2, which mandates the issuance of 
appointment letter and attendance slip. It is submitted that there is no violation of Section 25F, 25G and 
25H of the Act and it is prayed that the claim statement of workman may be dismissed with cost qua 
respondent no.2. 


Rejoinder was also filed on behalf of workman rebutting the facts of written statement. 


Evidence of parties:- 


20. 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as WWI and tendered into evidence his affidavit 
Ex.WWI/A and has been cross examined by the AR for respondent no.!. AR for workman closed the 
evidence on 23.08.2024. 


Documents relied upon by the workman:- 


Sr. No. Document Date Ex. 
l. Letter 0.04.206 Wi/l 
2s Detail of manpower Wi/2 
3. Letter to Govt. Contractor 2.09.208 9४।/३ 
4. List of worker submitted by contractor १४॥/4 
5. Request by workman 27.04.209 WI/5 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 924] 


| ९ | Request by workman to DC Karnal ५४/6 
4 Request to SDM Indri, Karnal 8.09.208 WI/7 
a Reply 3.0.208 9४ /8 
| ? | Reply 3.0.208 Wi/9 
0. | Demand Notice 25.04.209 WI/0 
Il. Copy of Postal receipt Wi/il 
2. Certificate issued by respondent no.2 27.07.208 Wi/i2 
2. It is pertinent to mention here that the respondent no.! & 2 was proceeded ex parte on 3.0.2025 and 
the case was fixed for ex parte arguments. 
22. Ihave heard Id. counsel for the workman and given due consideration to the arguments raised by the Id. 


counsel for workman. 


Findings:- 


23. 


24. 


25. 


26. 


27; 


The first contention regarding the applicant is that whether applicant comes within the definition of 
workman as is defined in Section 2(s) of the Act. I may mention that applicant was appointed as Mali 
(gardner) as per his claim petition and affidavit submitted before the Tribunal. In plain words the 
applicant was performing his duties as labourer/unskilled worker. He was not in supervisory or 
administrative post requiring him to perform only administrative duties. While interpreting Section 2(s) 


Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20I] 
Supreme Court 2532, has observed as follows:- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are 
not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the 
meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make any 
distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract 
basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be 
inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for doing 
whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a 
workman.” 


Thus Hon’ble Supreme Court has clarified that the definition of workman also does not make any 
distinction between full time or part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is 
nothing in plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be infer that only person employed on 
regular basis or a person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on 
temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed 
hours is not a workman. In view of the ratio of law enunciated in the above ruling, in my considered 
opinion the applicant herein admittedly falls within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of 
the Act. 


The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analyzing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja 
Vs. Air India Limited in Civil Appeal ४०. 70266 dated 25.08, 20॥4, two well recognized tests to find out 
whether the labours are the contract employees of the principal employer are:- 


3) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


As regard the payment of salary to the workman, workman in his affidavit has mentioned that his salary 
was paid by the contractor i.e. respondent no.2. Hence, it emerges that workman was paid salary by the 
contractor and he was being controlled and supervised by the contractor. Thus, there does not exist any 
relationship of employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.l!. However, there 
exists relation of employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.2. 


It is also added here that as per definition of contractor as given in the Section 2(c) of the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 (hereinafter called as Contract Act), respondent no.2 was 


9242 


26. 


29. 


30. 


3. 


32. 


33. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


supplying contract labour to the respondent no.l. Thus, respondent no.2 would fall under the definition 
of contractor. Section 2(c) of the Contract Act is reproduced as under: 


“Contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes to produce a 
given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods or articles of 
manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract labour 
for any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor; 


The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa 
2928(36) FLR 266 dealt at length with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in 


Section 2(j) of the Act, and has laid down triple test for determining whether a particular establishment 
is industry or not. The triple test is where (a) systematic activity (b) organized by cooperation between 
employer and employee (the direct and substantial element is commercial (c) for the production or 
distribution of goods and services to calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes prima facie is an 
“Industry” in that enterprise. The workman was doing work i.e. systematic activity for respondent no. 
at the asking of respondent no.2 and there was cooperation between the workman and respondent no.2, 
which involve substantial commercial element for rendering service to satisfy human wants. Thus, 
respondent no.2 would be termed as industry. 


Workman in his affidavit has clearly stated that there was non-compliance of Section 25F, 25G and 25H 
of the Act. He also stated that he was appointed on 22.04.20I5 and was working with respondent no. 
through contractor. He was not given any compensation before terminating his services on 8.09.20]8. 
During the cross examination, workman has stated that he cannot produce the account statement. But he 
has placed on record certificate issued by respondent no.2, in which it is clearly mentioned that the 
workman was working with it from 0.04.206 till 5.05.20I8 and the monthly salary of workman was 
Rs.4,476/- In Thus, workman was employee of respondent no.2. There does not exist any relationship 
of employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.!. However, there exists relation of 
employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.2. 


Admittedly, there is non-compliance of Section 25F of the Act by respondent no.2. However, as regards 
violation of other provisions i.e. Section 25G and 25H of the Act, there is no evidence lead by the 
workman. Hence, workman is entitled for compensation from respondent no.2. 


So keeping in view the tenure of service rendered by the workman i.e. more than 3 years and salary 
given to him during the period of his stay with the contractor and non-compliance of Section 25F of the 
Act, this Tribunal is of the considered opinion that workman is entitled for compensation. 


Present workman employed on 22.04.205 and was terminated on 8.09.208 (more than 3 years), so he 
is entitled as per law titled as Hemant Babruvahan Parchake versus Social Welfare Officer, 
Somalwar Bhavan, Mount Road, Sadar, Nagpur and others AIR 202 BOM 760, wherein for 8 
months, a sum of Rs.25,000/- was granted as compensation, workman is granted for Rs.50,000/-. 
Respondent no.2 is directed to pay the workman Rs.50,000/- within one month from the date of the 
notification of the award failing which the respondent no.2 shall further pay interest @6% per annum 
from the date of award till the date of making payment. 


Let copy of this award be sent to Central Government for publication as required under Section !7 of 
the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. (747.—airarhrs विवाद अधिनियम (7947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पावर ग्रिड कॉर्पोरेशन ऑफ़ इंडिया लिमिटेड; बलविंदर कुमार सैनी, श्री परवीन कुमार के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों 
और श्री पुरुषोत्तम सिंह के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2, चंडीगढ़, 
पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 54/2020) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 


सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-247-आईआर/(डीयू)| 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9243 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 747.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 54/2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Power Grid Cooperation of India Ltd; Balwinder Kumar Saini and Shri Parveen Kumar which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-27-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 


(Presided over by Mr. Kamal Kant). 


ID No.54/2020 
Parveen Kumar S/o Sh. Sardara Ram R/o Gandhi Nagar, Tehsil Indri, District Karnal (Haryana). 
wannnnn- Workman 
Versus 
l. The General manager, Power Grid Cooperation of India Ltd. 800 KV West North, Interconnector, HVDC 
Project, House no.56l, Sector 2, Near OP Jindal Chowk, Kurukshetra, District Kurukshetra (Haryana) 
2. Balwinder Kumar Saini, Government Contractor & Supplier, 50-E, Street No.4, Partap Nagar, Patiala, Distt. 
Patiala. 
----Respondents 


Present:- Sh. Ashok Kumar, AR for workman. 


Respondent no.| & 2 already ex parte. 


AWARD : 03.06.2026 


l. The workman has filed the present claim statement directly under Section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 
947 (hereinafter called as ID Act) against his termination dated 8.09.208 claiming reinstatement in service 
with full back wages, continuity of service and all consequential benefits. 


2. Brief facts of the case as per claim statement filed by the workman are that the workman was appointed as 
Mali (Gardener) for the work of Horticulture maintenance by respondent no.! through respondent No. 2 on 
0.04.206 at the monthly wages of Rs.!300/- per month after deduction of ESI and PF etc. Still respondent 
no.2 is having contract of work of horticulture maintenance with respondent no.!. The workman remained in 
service till 8.09.20I8 and his last wages were 7२६5. 0345/- after deductions. But the respondents paid only 
Rs.899]/- per month and due to this reason, the workman objected the illegal deduction of salary and he made 
complaint to the GM and DGM and concerned Incharge JE and they threatened him to terminate his services. 
Aggrieved by this, the workman along with other workmen made a complaint in writing to the Labour 
Inspector and Labour Inspector made inspection on the complaint. At this, respondents started to harass the 
workman ultimately, illegally terminated his services on 8.09.20I8 by verbal order. He was not paid 
minimum wages as fixed by the Central Government from time to time for the post of Mali (gardener) as 
skilled worker. 


3. Aggrieved by order of termination, the workman filed a demand notice with Assistant Labour Commissioner 
(Central), Labour Department Central Government, Karnal (hereinafter called as ALC Karnal) on 26.09.208. 
However, the conciliation proceedings failed and ALC Karnal issued a certificate to enable the workman to 
approach this Tribunal. 


4. The workman along with other workers filed CWP No.35459 of 20]9 titled as “Sanjay Kumar and others V/s 
General Manager, Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. and another” before the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana 
High Court and the same was disposed of with the liberty to approach the Labour Court vide order dated 
2.0I.2020. 


5. No charge sheet or inquiry or any notice before termination of services of the workman was ever served upon 
the workman. No permission from Government was obtained for termination of services of the workman. 
Before filing the demand notice, the workman requested many times for reinstatement into service, but all 
in vain. 


9244 


0. 


il. 


2. 


3. 


4, 


5. 


6. 


7. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


The workman had worked more than 240 days in a year and his services have been terminated without 
following the procedure prescribed under Section 25G, 25H and 25F of the Act. Many juniors to the workman 
have been appointed by the respondents and even fresh appointments have been made by the respondents on 
low wages, which is unfair labour practice. The workman is not gainfully employed after termination of his 
services on 8.09.208. 


The respondents have not issued any appointment letter, attendance slip, ESI card or any other document. 
Neither the principal employer i.e., respondent no.| has obtained license under Section 7 of the Abolition of 
Labour Contract Act nor the contractor i.e., respondent no.2 is registered under Section !2 with the Central 
Labour Department. Therefore, mode of payment is a mere camouflage just to deprive the workman from his 
legal rights regarding regularization of the services with respondent no.l. No record has been maintained by 
the respondent no.! or respondent no.2 as per requirement of Section 29 of Contract Act. It is maintained that 
the termination of workman w.e.f. [8.09.208 is illegal and it is prayed that the workman may be reinstated in 
servicewith full back wages, continuity of service and all consequential benefits. 


Notice of the claim petition was given to the respondents. 


Respondent no.! filed reply to the claim petition maintaining therein that the workman was never appointed by 
answering respondent. Respondent no.| had awarded contract to respondent no.2 vide LOA dated 30.03.206 
(Maintenance of Horticulture work around the transit camp at 800 KV HVDC terminal at Kurukshetra) for the 
duration of two years, further, one year extension and the said contract had expired with efflux of time and no 
extension was granted. Thereafter, through detailed tendering process, the contract was again awarded to 
respondent no 2 vide LOA dated 5.05.208 for another two years with provision of one year extension. The 
said contract expired in the month of May 202]. 


There is no employer-employee relationship between workman and respondent no.| as workmen was deployed 
by contractor as per the provision of Contract and he is employee of the contractor, not of the respondent no. | 


Respondent no.| vide letter dated 2.09.20l8 addressed to respondent no.2, brought the shortcoming of 
horticulture work in his attention by specifically pointing out that the manpower engaged/deployed by him i.e. 
engaged Mali don't have the proper horticulture knowledge and advised respondent no.2 to improve the 
shortcomings. 


The services of the workman were never terminated by respondent no.| and due minimum wages were paid to 
him as per the relevant provisions of contract in line with applicable laws. 


The workman was contract labour for respondent no.! and never remained a direct employee of respondent 
no.l. Further, the workman was under the direct supervision and control of respondent No.2 and salary to him 
was being paid by respondent No.2. Therefore, question of violation of Section 25 F, 25 G and 25 H of the Act 
does not arise qua respondent no.| as no industrial dispute exists between the workman and respondent no. |. 


Respondent no.! has duly registered its establishment u/s 7 of Contract Labour Regulation and Abolition) Act 
970 and proper records have been maintained as per the statutory requirement of Section 29 of the said Act. 
Being a central public sector enterprise, respondent no.| always abides the labour compliance within the time 
bound manner. It is prayed that the claim statement may be dismissed qua respondent no.|. 


Respondent no.2 also filed reply thereof maintaining therein that contract for the work "Maintenance of 
Horticulture work around Transit Camp at 800 KV Terminal, Kurukshetra" for a period of 2 years with a 
provision of further one year extension, was awarded through tendering process to respondent no.2 by 
respondent No.l vide its letter dated 3!.03.20l6 and the contract period of this work was closed on 
5.05.20i8. Thereafter new tender bid was opened on 9.04.20I8 and further Contract for a period of 2 years 
with one year extension provision was awarded by respondent no.! vide its letter dated 5.05.208 i.e. upto 
5.05.2020 and as per the terms of contract, it was extended for one year i.e. till [5.05.202. Respondent No.2 
has no work after the date of expiry of said extension with respondent no.|. 


Work and conduct of workman was poor and insolent. The workman abdicated his work many a times and in 
view of this, respondent no.l, whose work was severally affected due to his deplorable and unsatisfactory 
performance, addressed a letter dated 2.09.20l8 to respondent no.2 and thereupon immediately, workman 
was called to make amends in his duties and do the work in disciplined way, however, workman started 
misbehaving and threatening. Taking into account the consistent misbehaving and insolent attitude of 
working,respondent no.2 had no option, except to discontinue the services of workman. His termination was 
made purely for unsatisfactory performance of duties workman. 


Due minimum wages were paid to the workman as per the relevant provisions of law and contract. The 
workman has deliberately approached the Hon'ble High Court just to cause delay and harass respondent no.?2, 


8. 


9, 


20. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र :अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 9478 9245 


despite the clear and precise direction of conciliation officer on dated 06.2.20l8 to approach the Central 
Government Industrial cum Labour Court. 


The provisions of Contract Act are not applicable to respondent no.2, which mandates the issuance of 
appointment letter and attendance slip. It is submitted that there is no violation of Section 25F, 25G and 25H of 
the Act and it is prayed that the claim statement of workman may be dismissed with cost qua respondent no.2. 


Rejoinder was also filed on behalf of workman rebutting the facts of written statement. 


Evidence of parties:- 


In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as मैं] and tendered into evidence his affidavit 
Ex.WI/A and has been cross examined by the AR for respondent no.!. AR for workman closed the evidence 
on 23.08.2024. 


Documents relied upon by the workman:- 


2I. 


22. 


Sr. No. Document [Date sd Ex. 

l. Letter 0.04.206 Wi/l 
2. Detail of manpower 0.04.206 WI/2 
3. Letter to Govt. Contractor 2.09.208 WI/3 
4 List of worker submitted by १४॥/4 

contractor 
5. Request by workman 27.04.209 WI/5 

6. . | Request by workman to DC Karnal WI/6 
7 Request to SDM Indri, Karnal 8.09.208 WI/7 
[8है. | Reply 3.0.208 WI/8 
|9. | Reply 3.0.208 WI/9 
0. Demand Notice 25.04.209 WI/0 
Il. Copy of Postal receipt Wi/il 
क्‍2: Certificate issued by respondent no.2__| 27.08.208 WI/i2 


It is pertinent to mention here that the respondent no.! & 2 was proceeded ex parte on 3.l0.2025 and the case 
was fixed for ex parte arguments. 


I have heard Id. counsel for the workman and given due consideration to the arguments raised by the ld. 
counsel for workman. 


Findings:- 


23. 


24. 


The first contention regarding the applicant is that whether applicant comes within the definition of workman 
as is defined in Section 2(s) of the Act. I may mention that applicant was appointed as Mali (gardner) as per his 
claim petition and affidavit submitted before the Tribunal. In plain words the applicant was performing his 
duties as labourer/unskilled worker. He was not in supervisory or administrative post requiring him to perform 
only administrative duties. While interpreting Section 2(s) Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Devinder 


Singh Vs. Municipal Council, Sanaur, AIR 20l] Supreme Court 2532, has observed as follows:- 


“The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions of 
employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of payment are 
not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman within the 
meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does not make any 
distinction between full time and part time employee or a person appointed on contract 
basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 2(s) from which it can be 
inferred that only person employed on regular basis or a person employed for doing 
whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a 
workman.” 


Thus Hon’ble Supreme Court has clarified that the definition of workman also does not make any distinction 
between full time or part time employee or a person appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in plain 
language of Section 2(s) from which it can be infer that only person employed on regular basis or a person 
employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed on temporary, part time or contract 
basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman. In view of the 
ratio of law enunciated in the above ruling, in my considered opinion the applicant herein admittedly falls 
within the definition of ‘workman’ under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


9246 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


3l. 


32. 


33. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


The Hon’ble Supreme Court after analyzing the catena of cases has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air 
India Limited in Civil Appeal No.l0266 dated 25.08.20i4, two well recognized tests to find out whether the 
labours are the contract employees of the principal employer are:- 


3) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


As regard the payment of salary to the workman, workman in his affidavit has mentioned that his salary was 
paid by the contractor i.e. respondent no.2. Hence, it emerges that workman was paid salary by the contractor 
and he was being controlled and supervised by the contractor. Thus, there does not exist any relationship of 
employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.l. However, there exists relation of 
employee and employer between the workman and respondent no.2. 


It is also added here that as per definition of contractor as given in the Section 2(c) of the Contract Labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act, 970 (hereinafter called as Contract Act), respondent no.2 was supplying 
contract labour to the respondent no.l. Thus, respondent no.2 would fall under the definition of contractor. 
Section 2(c) of the Contract Act is reproduced as under: 


“Contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes to 
produce a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods or 
articles of manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies 
contract labour for any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor; 


The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa /9०780(36) 
FLR 266 dealt at length with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the 


Act, and has laid down triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is industry or not. The 
triple test is where (a) systematic activity (b) organized by cooperation between employer and employee (the 
direct and substantial element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of goods and services to 
calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that enterprise. The workman was 
doing work i.e. systematic activity for respondent no.| at the asking of respondent no.2 and there was 
cooperation between the workman and respondent no.2, which involve substantial commercial element for 
rendering service to satisfy human wants. Thus, respondent no.2 would be termed as industry. 


Workman in his affidavit has clearly stated that there was non-compliance of Section 25F, 25G and 25H of the 
Act. He also stated that he was appointed on 22.04.20I5 and was working with respondent no.! through 
contractor. He was not given any compensation before terminating his services on |8.09.208. During the 
cross examination, workman has stated that he cannot produce the account statement. But he has placed on 
record certificate issued by respondent no.2, in which it is clearly mentioned that the workman was working 
with it from 0.04.20I6 till 5.05.208 and the monthly salary of workman was ६. 4,476/- In Thus, workman 
was employee of respondent no.2. There does not exist any relationship of employee and employer between 
the workman and respondent no.l. However, there exists relation of employee and employer between the 
workman and respondent no.2. 


Admittedly, there is non-compliance of Section 25F of the Act by respondent no.2. However, as regards 
violation of other provisions i.e. Section 25G and 25H of the Act, there is no evidence lead by the workman. 
Hence, workman is entitled for compensation from respondent no.2. 


So keeping in view the tenure of service rendered by the workman i.e. more than 3 years and salary given to 
him during the period of his stay with the contractor and non-compliance of Section 25F of the Act, this 
Tribunal is of the considered opinion that workman is entitled for compensation. 


Present workman employed on 22.04.20I5 and was terminated on |8.09.20I8 (more than 3 years), so he is 
entitled as per law titled as Hemant Babruvahan Parchake versus Social Welfare Officer, Somalwar 
Bhavan, Mount Road, Sadar, Nagpur and others AIR 202] BOM 760, wherein for 8 months, a sum of 
Rs.25,000/- was granted as compensation, workman is granted for Rs.50,000/-. Respondent no.2 is directed to 
pay the workman Rs.50,000/- within one month from the date of the notification of the award failing which the 
respondent no.2 shall further pay interest @6% per annum from the date of award till the date of making 
payment. 


Let copy of this award be sent to Central Government for publication as required under Section 47 of the Act. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9247 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4748.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (7947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
इंस्टिट्यूट ऑफ़ हिमालयन बायोरिसोर्स टेक्नोलॉजी; ओम प्रकाश के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री पुरुषोत्तम सिंह के 
बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2, चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स 
न.- 44/2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 
07.08.2026 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-470-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 748.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 44/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology; Om Prakash and Shri Purshotam Singh which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-70-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh 
(Present:- Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer) 


ID No.44/209 


Purshotam Singh S/o Sh. Kali Das through R K Singh Parmar, General Secretary Punjab INTUC L-2]] Brari 
PO Partap Nagar, Nangal, Tehsil Nangal, District Rupnagar (Punjab). 
waonnnn- Workman 
Versus 
l. Director Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology, (CSIR Complex) Palampur, District Kangra, 
Himachal Pradesh. 
2. Om Parkash (Govt. Contractor) S/o Sh. Dumnoo Ram, R/o VPO Kandral, Tehsil Bajinath, District 
Kangra, Himachal Pradesh. 
------ Respondents 


Present:- Sh. R P Rana, AR for workman. 
Sh. 0 ७8 Sidhu, AR for respondent no.!. 
Respondent no.2 already ex parte. 


Award : 23.04.2026 


l. Workman has filed the present petition/complaint under Section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 
(hereinafter called the Act) against his termination by respondent no.l & 2 on 28..2024. 


2: The brief facts, related to the case are that the workman was terminated orally by respondents on 
28..20i4 during the pendency of the main reference bearing no.255 of 20i3 contravening Section 33 of the 
Act. It is prayed that termination be set aside and appropriate order be passed. 


3. Notice of complaint was given to the respondents. 


4. Respondent no.| filed reply thereof maintaining therein that the workman was never employed by 
respondent no.! and no master and servant relation exists between respondent no.l and the workman. 
Workman was deployed by respondent no.2 as a part of the man-force for executing the work in terms of the 
agreement dated |8.07.20I3 which expired in July, 20l4 and thereafter no further contract was awarded to 
respondent no.2 nor any man-force has been deployed. The respondent No.2 had been paid the bills submitted 
by him, in terms of the agreement with him. Termination of service of the workman is on the part of 
respondent No.2 i.e. contractor. In any case, since the workman was never employed in the service of 
respondent no.l, the question of violation of any service condition during the pendency of the reference 
No.255 203 does not arise against respondent no.!. It is prayed that the application may be rejected against 
respondent no.|!. 


9248 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


5. It is pertinent to mention here that respondent no.2 was proceeded ex parte on 26.02.2020. 


Evidence of parties:- 


6. In order to prove his case, workman examined himself as ४४५७४] and tendered into evidence his affidavit 
४४५७ |/७ and has been cross examined by the AR for respondent no.!. AR for workman closed the evidence 
on 22.0.2025. 


7. List of documents, original exhibited with ID No.85/20l5 Bir Singh Vs IHBT, photocopy placed in 


file:- 

Sr. No. Document Dated Exhibit 
Ls Bill 24.05.203 Ex.W-| 
2. Bill 22.03.202] Ex.W-2 
3. Bill 22.03.202] Ex.W-3 
4. Bill 22.07.200 Ex.W-4 
5. Bill 23.03.2007 Ex.W-5 
[Lee oF : Bill 28.03.2007 Ex.W-6 
7. Bill 07.09.200 Ex.W-7 


8. Respondent no.l has examined Sh. Shankar Das, Controller of Administration, CSIR-IHBT, Palampur 
Palampur as RW, who tendered into evidence his affidavit २७४|/७ along with documents 7२५७४-।/] and has 
been cross examined by AR for workman. AR for respondent no.! closed the evidence on 08.0.2026. 


List of documents:- 


Sr. Agreement Dated Period 
No. 
l, Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 24.05.996 3.03.996 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 2.03.997 
2. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.06. 998 0.09.997 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 3.08.998 
3. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.06. 998 5.04.998 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 4.04.999 
4. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.06.998 6.04.998 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 5.04.999 
ar Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.05.999 0.04.999 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 3.03.2000 
feel Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 05.05.999 0.05.999 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 30.04.2000 
7. Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 28.07.2000 0.07.2000 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 30.06.200 
| : Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Ex.RW- | 08.07.200] 6.07.200] to 
I/l Colly) 5.07.2002 
ee | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.07.200] 6.07.200] to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 5.07.2002 
0. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.07.200] 6.07.200] to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 5.07.2002 
ll. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
2. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
3. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
4. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 0.03.2004 0.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 09.08.2004 
5. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 22.03.2004 2.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) |.08. 2004 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9249 


6. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 22.03.2004 2.02.2004 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) | .08. 2004 

7. [लाल (Part of +5.२५७४-।/] Colly) 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
05.2.2005 

8. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/2) 05.2.2005 

9. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.2.2005 

20. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.2.2005 

2l. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 06.06.2005 06.06.2005 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.2.2005 

22. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.0.2008 06.0.2008 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.0.2009 

23. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.0.2008 06.0.2008 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.0.2009 

24. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 6.0.2008 06.0.2008 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 05.0.2009 

25. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.0.200 07.0.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.0I.202 

26. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.2.200 07.2.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.2.20I2 

27. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.2.200 07.2.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.2.202 

28. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 07.2.200 07.2.200 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 06.2.202 

29. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 09.2.202 09.2.202 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 08.2.204 

30. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 9.2.202 9.2.202 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 8.2.204 

3l. | Agreement with M/s Om Prakash Kapoor (Part of 9.2.202 9.2.202 to 
Ex.RW-I/I Colly) 8.2.204 


Submissions of workman:- 


9. While arguing the case, AR for workman contended that in this case, reference was pending before this 
Tribunal bearing ID _No.255 of 20I3 titled as The General Secretary, Institute of Himalayan Bio-Source 
Technology (CSIR) Shramik Sangh, Palampur, Distt. Kangra versus The Director, Himalayan Bio-source 
Technology (CSIR) regarding regularization of service and accepting all other demands raised by union of 
workers, of which present workman is also a party. During the pendency of that reference, workman was 
removed from service orally on 28..204 by respondent no.2 without seeking permission from this Court 
under Section 33(2)(b) of the Act, which is illegal. Workman would be deemed to be in the service of 
respondent no.!. He further contended that in this case, respondent no.2 was allotted contract by respondent 
no.! for the period 9.2.202 to 8.2.204. However, the said period was reduced to 30..204 and the 
workman was paid salary upto 28.!.20I4 and on that date, his services were dispensed with. He thus 
contended that the workman is liable to be reinstated into service. 


Submissions of respondent no.|:- 


0. While arguing the case, AR for respondent no.l! contended that IHBT i.e. respondent no.! being 
subsidiary of CSIR is not covered under the definition of Industry as defined under the Act. To support this 
view, he place reliance upon Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and others versus Sri Rishi 
Dev Mishra and other (Writ —C ५७०. /0050/0 of 2006). 


ll. He further contended that there is no master and servant relation between respondent no.| and the 
workman. To support this view, he placed reliance upon The Joint Secretary, Central Board of Secondary 
education _and_ another versus Raj Kumar Mishra_and another (SLP (C) No.22030_of 2023. He further 
placed reliance upon Kirlosker Brothers Ltd. Vs. Ramcharan_and others (2022 INSC_255). He further 


contended that CSIR Service Rules are not applicable to the workman. No appointment letter was given to the 
workman. He thus contended that the complaint be dismissed. 


Findings:- 
॥2: I have given due consideration to the arguments advanced by Sh. R P Rana (AR for workman), Sh. 
GS Sidhu (AR for respondent no.!). 


9250 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


3. First question which arise for consideration is whether the applicant is workman as defined under 
Section 2(s) of the Act. To my mind, the claimant is a workman within the definition of Section 2(s) of the 
Act. In this regard, reliance can be made to the decision in the case of Devinder Singh Vs. Municipal Council, 
Sanaur, AIR 2077 Supreme Court 2532, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court while interpreting the provisions of 
Section 2(s) of the Act which deals with the definition of "workman" has observed as under : 


"The source of employment, the quantum of recruitment, the terms & conditions 
of employment/ contract of service, the quantum of wages/ pay and mode of 
payment are not at all relevant for deciding whether or not a person is a workman 
within the meaning of Section 2(s) of the Act. The definition of workman also does 
not make any distinction between full time and part time employee or a person 
appointed on contract basis. There is nothing in the plain language of Section 
2(s) from which it can be inferred that only person employed on regular basis or 
a person employed for doing whole time job is a workman and the one employed 
on temporary, part time or contract basis on fixed wages or as a casual employee 
or for doing duty for fixed hours is not a workman.” 


It is clear from the perusal of aforesaid observations that even if a person is engaged on temporary, part 
time or contract basis or for doing any other kind of work and is duly paid wages for the said work, in that 
eventuality such a person would be covered by the definition of "workman" as provided in Section 2(s) of the 
Act. Thus, nature of appointment or source of appointment is not relevant to be a "workman" within the Act. 
Since, the workman was engaged on contract basis by respondent no.2 for the work of respondent no.|, thus it 
would be termed as workman under Section 2(s) of the Act. 


4. Next question which arises for consideration is whether respondent no.| is an industry. The Hon’ble 
Apex Court in the case of Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board Vs. A. Rajappa /9726(36) FLR 266 
dealt at length with the ambit and scope of expression “industry” as defined in Section 2(j) of the Act, and has 
laid down triple test for determining whether a particular establishment is industry or not. The triple test is 
where (a) systematic activity (b) organised by cooperation between employer and employee (the direct and 
substantial element is commercial (c) for the production or distribution of goods and services to calculated to 
satisfy human wants and wishes prima facie is an “Industry” in that enterprise. Relevant part of judgment of 


Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra) is reproduced as under:- 


“Does research involve collaboration between employer and employee? It does. The 
employer is the institution, the employees are the scientists, para-scientists and other 
personnel. Is scientific research service? Undoubtedly it is. Its discoveries are valuable 
contributions to the wealth of the nation. Such discoveries may be sold for a heavy price 
in the industrial or other markets. Technology has to be plate for and technological 
inventions and innovations may be patented and sold. In our scientific and technological 
age nothing has more cash value, as intangible goods and invaluable services, than 
discoveries. For instance, the discoveries of Thomas Alva Edison made him fabulously 
rich. It has been said that his brain had the highest cash value in history for he made the 
world vibrate with the miraculous discovery of recorded, sound. Unlike most inventors, 
he did not have to wait to get his reward in heaven; he received, it munificently on this 
gratified and grateful earth, thanks to conversion of his inventions into, money a plenty. 
Research benefits industry. Even though a research institute may be a separate entity 
disconnected from the many industries which funded the institute itself, it can be 
regarded as an Organisation, propelled by systematic activity, modeled on co-operation 
between employer and employee and calculated to throw up discoveries and inventions 
and useful solutions which benefit individual industries and the nation in terms of goods 
and services and wealth. It follows that research institutes, albeit run without profit- 
motive, are industries.” 


5. In the present case, respondent no.| is doing research work and as per RWI Sh. Shankar Das Rishi, 
products are sold in the institute for display purposes of the products. He has also admitted that vide Ex.W to 
W7, various products of the institute have been sold to the customers. Thus, respondent no.! is engaged in 
systematic activity organized by cooperation between employer and employee (employees being workmen in 
the present case) for the production or distribution of goods and services to calculated to satisfy human wants. 
In this regard, it is carrying out research. In addition to this, from the research work, benefits are being driven 
by respondent no.| and as per observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage 
Board (supra), respondent no.| falls under the definition of ‘industry’ as defined under the Act. 


6. So far as argument of AR for respondent no.| that respondent no.| being instrumentality of state 
does not fall under the definition of ‘industry’. In this regard, Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Chief 


Conservator of Forest Versus Jagannath Maruti Kondhare (/9०9०6 (2) SCT 764), has held that work, which 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 925[ 


was not be regarded as a part of inalienable of inescapable function of the State and which work can be well 
undertaken by a private agency does not require an instrumentality of State, such functions of the State fall 
within the ambit of Industry. Thus, function of doing research and other allied works of selling of goods and 
earning from research cannot be said to be sovereign function of the State and thus for this purpose of 
industrial dispute, respondents would be termed as industry. 


7. Thus, from every angle, respondent no.! is an industry. Moreover, its employees are not governed 
by IHBT Rules or CCS Rules, thus it is an industry. In view of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court titled 
as Banglore Water Supply & Sewerage Board (supra), decided by Hon'ble Supreme Court, the case law 
Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and others (supra) decided by Hon'ble High Court at 


Allahabad cited by AR for respondent no.| is not attracted to the facts and circumstances of the present case. 


8. It is also added here that as per definition of contractor as given in the Section 2(c) of the Contract 
Labour (Regulation and Abolition) Act, !970 (hereinafter called as Contract Act), respondent no.2 was 
supplying contract labour to the respondent no.!. Thus, he would also fall under the definition of contractor. 
Section 2(c) of the Contract Act is reproduced as under: 


“Contractor”, in relation to an establishment, means a person who undertakes to produce 
a given result for the establishment, other than a mere supply of goods or articles of 
manufacture to such establishment, through contract labour or who supplies contract 
labour for any work of the establishment and includes a sub-contractor; 


9. The workman was doing work i.e. systematic activity for respondent no.| at the asking of 
respondent no.2 and there was cooperation between the workman and respondent no.2, which involve 
substantial commercial element for rendering service to satisfy human wants. Thus, as per Banglore Water 
Supply (supra), respondent no.2 would be termed as industry. 


20. Next question, which arises for consideration is whether there exists relationship of employer and 
employee between respondent no.! and present workman. In this regard, it is pointed out that admittedly in 
this case, union of workmen has filed ID No.255 of 20I3 titled as The General Secretary, Institute of 

Himalayan Bio-Source Technology (CSIR) (supra), wherein name of the worker appeared at Sr. No.72 of the 
list of enclosed by union as Annexure P-4. It is further pointed out that in order to prove relationship of 
employer and employee i.e. master and servant, the Hon’ble Supreme Court after analyzing the catena of cases 


has laid down in Balwant Raj Saluja Vs. Air India Limited in Civil Appeal ५०. /0266 dated 25.06. 20/4 two 
well recognized tests to find out whether the labours are the contract employees of the principal employer are:- 


3) Whether the principal employer pays the salary instead of contractor and 
2) Whether the principal employer controls and supervise the work of the employees? 


In this case, admittedly wages were paid by respondent no.2, however, control was of the respondent no.|. 
Thus, under these circumstances, it is held that there exist relationship of master and servant between 
respondent no.! and workman. 


2i. Further, in the present case, admittedly respondent no.! is entering into different contract 
agreements with respondent no.2 (..२५७४॥/| Colly as detailed above) by retaining same workmen and thus 
contracts are sham in view of the observation of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in similar matter in Management of 
CPWD versus Anand Kumar Gautam and ors. (2024:DHC:2757) which is as under: 


“Contract labourers can be engaged for the work of contractor only and not for the work 
of any establishment. In the present case the work is of the establishment and not of the 
contractor. The term supply of labour by a contractor is against human dignity. No one 
can be a supplier of human labour to any establishment. It is the duty of State to give 
employment to citizen and not of the contractors. Contractors cannot supply labour to any 
establishment. In view of the above discussion it becomes quite obvious that the 
contractors workmen in the instant case have been retained all along and contractors have 
been changed. So the contractor is only a label of a bottle. This label is changed from time 
to time but the contents of the bottle always remain the same. The contractors have been 
changed and the workmen have been retained. Such a system is in-human. The contractors 
are the direct employees of the respondent/management. 


From the foregoing it becomes quite obvious that these two workmen have been working 
regularly and even without artificial breaks since /995-96, The contract is camouflage. 
There_is direct relation ० master_and_servant_between_the_respondent_and_the 


workmen.” 


22. Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Bhilwara Dugdh Utpadak Sahakari S. Ltd. Versus Vinod 
Kumar Sharma dead by LRs and others (AIR 20/7 Supreme Court 3546) has held as under:- 


9252 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4. In order to avoid their liability under various labour statutes employers are very often 
resorting to subterfuge by trying to show that their employees are in fact, the employees of 
a contractor. It is high time that this subterfuge must come to an end. 


5. Labour statutes were meant to protect the employees/workmen because it was realized 
that the employers and the employees are not on an equal bargaining position. Hence, 
protection of employees was required so that they may not be exploited. However, this new 
technique of subterfuge has been adopted by some employers in recent years in order to 
deny the rights of the workmen under various labour statutes by showing that the 
concerned workmen are not their employees but are the employees/workmen of a 
contractor, or that they are merely daily wage or short term or casual employees when in 
fact they are doing the work of regular employees. 


23. Thus, from the above observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is clear that respondent no.] has 
resorted to subterfuge by trying to show that workman was employee of respondent no.2. 


24. Moreover, respondent no.| entered in various agreements with respondent no.2 (Ex.RWI/I Colly), 
which shows that there is practice that the contract for engagement of the employer/labour through contractors 
changes on the basis of bid of the contractors every year. The contractor may change but the 
employees/labourers always remain same. The workman was already working with the management when the 
contract was tendered to the respondent no.2. Neither the workman was engaged by respondent no.2 nor the 
services of workman were terminated by respondent no.2. It is the respondent no.! who uses to select/engage 
and terminate the labour/workman and respondent no.2 has no role in the same. Thus, it shows that the 
contract was just an eyewash. It is further submitted that contract was allotted to respondent no.2 by 
respondent no.!l on different years as per Ex.RWI/I (colly) and sometime to other contractors, meaning 
thereby the respondent no.! is controlling authority of the workmen including their engagement, termination 
etc. and even the wages of workman were also decided by respondent no.! only and respondent no.2 has no 
role to play in the same. So, there exist relationship of employees/servant and employer/master between the 
workmen and respondent no.l. Thus, the judgment Zhe Joint Secretary, Central _Board_of Secondary 
education and another (supra) cited by AR for respondent no.! is not attracted to the present case as in this 
case, time and again, same workers were being engaged through contractor and in view of clear cut dictum of 
Hon'ble Delhi High Court in Management of CPWD (supra), the aforementioned case law is not attracted. 


25. So far as Kirlosker Brothers Ltd. Vs. Ramcharan and others (supra) relied upon by the AR for 


respondent no.l is concerned, facts and circumstances of this case are distinguishable. In the said Kirlosker 
Brothers Ltd. Vs. Ramcharan and others (supra), Court has held that that when there are no allegations or 
findings of sham and bogus contract then the contention of the reinstatement or the absorption of the workman 
cannot be sustained but the facts of the matter at hand is different from the facts of the case as in the instant 
case. In this case, workman was working since long and the work was of perennial nature. Thus, it tantamount 
to unfair labour practice. 


26. It is added here that admittedly in this case, workman was discharged by the respondent no.l & 2 
and as per agreement स.२७७।/| (colly), contract was awarded to respondent no.2 by respondent no.! for a 
period of two years i.e. from 9.2.20l2 to 8.2.20l4. However, workman was discharged prior to that on 
28..204. 


27. No prior permission was taken by respondent no.! & 2 before the discharging the services of 
workman. Section 33(2)(b) of the Act is very material and the same is reproduced below:- 


“(b) for any misconduct not connected with the dispute, or discharge or punish, whether 
by dismissal or otherwise, that workman: 


Provided that no such workman shall be discharged or dismissed, unless he has 
been paid wages for one month and an application has been made by the employer to the 
authority before which the proceeding is pending for approval of the action taken by the 
employer.” 


28. As per aforesaid provision, the workman can be discharged or dismissed after paying one month 
wages and after getting approval of the competent authority. In this case, no wages for one month was paid nor 
any permission from competent authority was taken before discharging the workman and consequently, it 
would be considered that workman was in regular services of the workman. A Full Constitutional Bench of 
Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled as Jaipur Zila Sahakari Bhoomi Vikas Bank Ltd. versus Ram Gopal 
Sharma and others (2002 SCC (L_ & S) 279) has held that failure to make application for approval of the order 
of discharge or dismissal or withdrawal of such application after making it, held, renders the order of discharge 
or dismissal void and inoperative. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9253 


29. The present application under Section 33A is well maintainable and purpose has also been defined 
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaipur Zila Sahakari Bhoomi Vikas Bank Lid. (supra) case, which read as 
follows:- 


Section 33A is available to an employee and is intended to save his time and trouble in as 
much as he can straightway make a complaint before the very authority, where the 
industrial dispute is already pending between the parties, challenging the order of 
approval instead of making efforts to raise an industrial dispute, get a reference and 
thereafter adjudication. Section 3] speaks of penalty in respect of the offences stated 
therein. This provision is not intended to give any remedy to an aggrieved employee. It is 
only to punish the offender. Merely because penal provision is available or a workman has 
a further remedy under Section 33A to challenge the approval granted, it canoe be said 
that the order of discharge or dismissal does not become inoperative or invalid unless set 
aside under Section 33A. 


30. In view of the above discussion, the termination of workman on 28..204 is bad in law and hence 
is set aside. In this case, both the respondents in connivance with each other have dispensed the services of the 
workman. Hence, both respondents are liable. The workman is entitled for reinstatement along with full back 
wages. It is ordered accordingly. The services of the workman would not be discharged/terminated during the 
pendency of the ID No.255 of 20i3, wherein, they have claimed various demands vide charter of demands 
dated 09.05.20l!. However, in case workman has attained the age of retirement, then he would be entitled for 
full back wages along with other consequential benefits instead of reinstatement in service. 


3i: Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section |7 of the 
Act for publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 749.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
aerated सिक्‍योरिटी एंड एलाइड सर्विसेज़ के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री मनिंदर पाल सिंह के बीच अनुबंध 
में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-, चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 75/2025) को जैसा 
कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 


[सं.- एल-42025/07/2026-225-आईआर(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 749.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 5/2025) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-l, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Cyclops Security and Allied Services and Shri Maninder Pal Singh which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026-225-IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Chandigarh 
(Present:-Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding-cum-Link Officer). 


ID No. i5/2025 
Registered on:-22.07.2025 


Maninder Pal Singh, 2[(39/2 Sector 45-C Chandigarh, Chandigarh-!60047. 


wannnn-- Workman 
Versus 


Cyclops Security and Allied Services, CGHS, Wellness Centre No.l, Sector 45 C, Chandigarh-60047. 


----Management 


9254 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
Present:- Sh. R.P. Rana, AR along with workman. 


Award :6.07.2026 


l. Central Government vide Notification No.8(50)/2024/RCH/C.II Dated 09.07.2025, sub-section (5) of 
Section |2 read with sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter called the 
Act), has referred the following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


“Whether the action of DG CGHS and AD CGHS Chandigarh & M/s Cyclops Security 
and Allied Services Pvt. Ltd. in terminating the employment of Shri Maninder Pal 
Singh w.e.f. 26.09.2024 without following the due process including section 25F, 25G 
and 25H of ID Act, 947 is legal and justified? If not, to what relief including 
reinstatement; back wages and compensation the workman is entitled to? 


Whether the action of management of DG CGHS and AD CGHS Chandigarh & M/s 
Cyclops Security and Allied Services Pvt. Ltd. in issuing and implementation of 
letter/direction vide CGHS HQ letter No.C.803/04/2022-CGHS-II dated 28.05.2022 
and AD/CGHS/Chandigarh/Gen/2024/20 dated 03.09.2024 leading to termination of 
employment of Shri Maninder Pal Singh without following the provisions of ID Act is 
legal and justified and constitutes unfair labour practice under Section 25T read with 
Schedule V of ID Act, 947?” 


2. This case is fixed for l9.0!.2027. However, an application dated 6.07.2026 was moved on behalf of the 
workman seeking permission to withdraw the present Industrial Dispute. Thereafter, the workman made the 
following statement:- 


, 


“I withdraw the present cased and the same may be dismissed as withdrawn.’ 


3. In view of the application filed on behalf of the Workman, as well as the statement made by the 
Workman, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a 'No Claim Award’. Accordingly, 'No Claim 
Award' is passed in the present industrial dispute. 


4. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 7 of the Act for 
publication. 
KAMAL KANT, Presiding-cum-Link Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4750.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 74) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
साइक्लोप्स सिक्‍योरिटी एंड एलाइड सर्विसेज़ के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री विजय कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम aaa, चंडीगढ़, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 74/2025) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026-224-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 750.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 ((4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 4/2025) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-l, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Cyclops Security and Allied Services and Shri Vijay Kumar which was received along with soft copy of 
the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 

[No. L-42025/07/2026-224-(IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Chandigarh 
(Present:-Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding-cum-Link Officer). 
ID No.4/2025 
Registered on:-22.07.2025 


Vijay Kumar, !73, New Indira Colony, Manimajra, Chandigarh, Chandigarh-l600, 9888689248. 


nannnn-- Workman 


[भाग ।--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9255 
Versus 


Cyclops Security and Allied Services, CGHS, Wellness Centre No.l, Sector 45 C, Chandigarh-60047. 


----Management 


Present:- Sh. R.P. Rana, AR along with workman. 


Award :6.07.2026 


l. Central Government vide Notification No.8(52)/2024/RCH/C.II Dated 09.07.2025, sub-section (5) of 
Section |2 read with sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter called the 
Act), has referred the following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


“Whether the action of DG CGHS and AD CGHS Chandigarh & M/s Cyclops Security 
and Allied Services Pvt. Ltd. in terminating the employment of Shri Vijay Kumar w.e.f. 
26.09.2024 without following the due process including section 25F, 25G and 25H of ID 
Act, 947 is legal and justified? If not, to what relief including reinstatement; back 
wages and compensation the workman is entitled to? 


Whether the action of management of DG CGHS and AD CGHS Chandigarh & M/s 
Cyclops Security and Allied Services Pvt. Ltd. in issuing and implementation of 
letter/direction vide CGHS HQ letter No.C.803/04/2022-CGHS-II dated 28.05.2022 
and AD/CGHS/Chandigarh/Gen/2024/20 dated 03.09.2024 leading to termination of 
employment of Shri Vijay Kumar without following the provisions of ID Act is legal 
and justified and constitutes unfair labour practice under Section 25T read with 
Schedule V of ID Act, 947?” 


2. This case is fixed for 9.0.2027. However, an application dated 6.07.2026 was moved on behalf of the 
workman seeking permission to withdraw the present Industrial Dispute. Thereafter, the workman made the 
following statement:- 


, 


“I withdraw the present cased and the same may be dismissed as withdrawn. ’ 


3. In view of the application filed on behalf of the Workman, as well as the statement made by the 
Workman, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a 'No Claim Award’. Accordingly, 'No Claim 
Award' is passed in the present industrial dispute. 


4. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding-cum-Link Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 75(.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
कमांडर वर्क्स इंजीनियर न के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और एमईएस सिविलियन वर्कर्स एंड एम्प्लॉइज यूनिय के बीच 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय-, चंडीगढ़, Tate (रिफरेन्स न.- 04/2022) 
को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 07.08.2026 
को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42044/484/2024-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


9.0. 75.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 0/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-l, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Commander Works Engineer and MES Civilian Workers & Employees Union which was received 
along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 07.08.2026. 


[No. L-420/8/202-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


9256 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Chandigarh 
(Presided over by Mr. Kamal Kant Presiding-cum-Link Officer). 
ID No. 0/2022 
Registered on:-!7.05.2022 
MES Civilian Workers & Employees Union Ferozpur, Punjab. 
no------ Workmen Union 
Versus 
Head Quarter, Commander Works Engineer, Ferozepur Cantt. Ferozepur, Punjab-!5200I. 
----Management 
Present:- None for Workmen Union. 


None for Management (already ex-parte). 


Award :29.05.2026 


l. Central Government Vide Notification No.L-420I/I8/202l(IR(DU)) dated 07.02.2022, Clause (d) of 
Sub-section (l) and Sub-Section (2A) of Section l0 of the Industrial Disputes 3९०,।947 (hereinafter called the 
Act), has referred the following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal. 


“Whether the demands raised by MES Civilian Workers & Employees Union 
Ferozpur (PB) vide letter dated 20.03, 202/ to the management of Commander Works 
Engineer, Ferozpur Cantt. is proper, legal and justified? If yes, to what reliefs the 
disputant workers are entitled? What directions are necessary in this matter?” 


l. The case is fixed for filing evidence by workmen union. However, no one is turning up on behalf of 
workmen Union from last two dates. Today also, no one turned up on behalf of workmen Union. The workmen 
Union has been given sufficient opportunities for filing claim statement, but no one turned up on behalf of 
workmen union in spite of the opportunities afforded to it for filing evidence, which shows that the workmen 
union is not interested in adjudication of the matter on merit. 


2. Since no one is appearing for the workmen union, as such, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to 
pass a'No Claim Award’. Accordingly, 'No Claim Award’ is passed in the present Industrial Dispute. 


3. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 47 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding-cum-Link Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. 4752.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 24/2003) को प्रकाशित करती है, 
(ai. Wel.42025/0/2026 — aig आर. (Ft-I)-8] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 752.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.2/2003) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-8] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9257 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 0™ day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No._2/2003 
[Old ID No. 245/2000 of Labour Court, Guntur] 
Between: 


Sri Sudarshanam Anil 


S/o Ananda Rao 
R/o Rayapudi, 
Thulluru Mandal, 
Guntur distt. 
... Petitioner 

And 
l. The Chairman, 

State Bank of India, 

Central office, 

Mumbai. 
2. The Chief General Manager, 

(Personnel) 

State Bank of India, 

Bank Street 

Hyderabad. 
3. The Regional Asst. General Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Zonal Office, Vijayawada Zone, 

Vijayawada. 
4. The Branch Manager, 

State Bank of India, 

Governorpet branch, 

Vijayawada 

Krishna district. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner ; Sri S. Adinarayana, Advocate 
For the Respondent ; Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


AWARD 


Sri Sudarshanam Anil who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier 
Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court, Guntur for adjudication and later the same has been 
transferred to this Tribunal bearing ID No. 245/2000, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H- 
026/I/200l-IR(C.II) dated 8.0.200I and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 2/2003. 


Di Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated !7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases 


9258 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7, Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 20I4 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from 8.9.84 to September, !996 and 
has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 2 years. The Respondent has terminated 
services of Workman by oral orders with effect from September, !996. Further, it is submitted that the management 
of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent 
appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after |.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9259 


consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9l by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the |7 
settlement (Ex १॥]), settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement (Ex M2), settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 97४ 
settlement (Ex M3), then settlement dated 9..9l is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 57 settlement 
(Ex M6). In between there is minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95 marked as Ex M5. That due to all 
these settlements which were extended by subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the 
list of the selected candidates arose with that it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be 
regularized in the services of the bank. The Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under 
the bonafide hope that sooner his services will be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options 
elsewhere. It is needless to point out that employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was 
made is a facet of Article 2 of the Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, !99, and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.!988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3.3.997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9260 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated !6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99! will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99l. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7.].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from September, !996 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, 
contrary to their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of 
the Constitution of India. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 926] 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97, Ex.M5 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is 
not published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3!.3.97 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Il.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec I8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period [987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after 975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 


9262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as !992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period ie., |.7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.!995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5 7 settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9263 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as ४5.४] to WIl. Further, the Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support 
of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI! to Ex.W4 are the service certificates. Ex.W5 is the transfer certificate. Ex.W6 is the caste certificate. 
Ex.W7 is the employment card. Ex.W68 is the interview call letter. Ex.W9 is the stay order. Ex.Wl0 is the 992 
panel list. Ex.W]] is the legal notice. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ४७७] Sri K. Chandra Sekhara Goud and this witness 
has exhibited l2 documents, marked as 5 5.४] to MI2. The details of these documents are as follows:- 


Ex.M.] is the Settlement dated !7.l.987. Ex.M2 is the Settlement dated l6.7.988. Ex.M3 is the Settlement 
dated 27.0.988. Ex.M4 is the Settlement dated 9.!.99l. Ex.M5 is the Minutes of the conciliation proceedings 
dated 9.6.!995. Ex.M6 is the Settlement dated 30.7.!996. Ex.M7 is the Memorandum of Understanding dt. 
27.2.997. Ex.M8 is the Particulars of 989 Messengerial Panel. Ex.M9 is the Particulars of 989 Non- 
Messengerial Panel. Ex.M0 is the Particulars of !992 General Attendant Panel. Ex.MII is the Judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court of A.P. in Writ Appeal No.86/98 dt.I.5.998. Ex.MI2 is the Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India in SLP No. 886-888 of 998 dt.l0.8.998. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2™ settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 4" settlement dated 9..99! and 5™ settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India, Main branch, Vijayawada in terminating the services of 
Workman Sri Sudarshanam Anil, a Messenger with effect from September, 996 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99l and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 () of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


9264 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from September, 996. The extract of the said letter is given below:- 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.[997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from September, 996.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from September, 996 due to reason of lapse of both panels ie., 989 & 992 on 3].3.[997 as per terms of 
settlements entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by 
Respondent Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary 
messengerial category appointment with effect from September, !996 and it has also been communicated to all 
concerned that the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 
3..997. Further, office order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal 
that the said office order has been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in 
permanent cadre, it has been decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or 
temporary employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the 
contents of the aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been 
stopped by the Respondent management with effect from September, 996 because of the lapsed of panel of 
temporary workers and daily wagers by 3.3.!997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.]997 is 
contained in the 5" settlement which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus 
of both the parties. Therefore, Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 
30.7.996 regarding lapse of panel on 3.3.997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff 
Federation. As per provision contained u/s.l8(l) of ID. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding 
on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 IT LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6//),. 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(7) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 


[भाग ॥---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9265 


But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.”’ 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 57 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on September, !996 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu 
thereof. Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under 
Section 25 F of I.D. Act, |947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 


9266 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


September, !996 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the 
Workman on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 


Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9267 


In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


ढ॥4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. y. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and_ Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., September, 996. 


In this context, ४४५७४] in his cross examination has stated that, 


“I was not sponsored by any employment exchange and did not undergo the regular process of selection before my 
engagement as temporary messenger in the branch..” 


“Tt is true that I did not work continuously for 240 days in any year in my entire service in the bank.” 


Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously in any 2 
months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, 
Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 days 
continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., September, 996. Thus, the claim 
of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, 
in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, [947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated September, 996 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, 
there was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. September, 996. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 


9268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the ID. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., September, 996. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from September, !996, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not 
to make temporary appointments from September, !996. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein 
has been terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from September, !996 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending 
upon the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the 
Respondent management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the 
Respondent bank cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the 
mandatory condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, !947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 B of the .D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated !8.!.993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9269 


lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3[.3,[997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 57 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./987 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2. /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8(/) of the 
I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.]997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 


9270 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. In this context the Workman witness WW was cross examined by the Respondent counsel and in the cross 
examination the witness WW states:- 


“I am not aware of the settlements between the federation and the Management. .... Further witness states, “Tt is true 
that Iam not having any documents to show that any of my juniors are continuing in service in the bank.” 


Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the 
Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular 
appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of 
seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has 
given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list !989 and [992 in 
breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make 
appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the 
Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of 
workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3. [997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till the both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7. [996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8(.) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article 4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 927] 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3[|.3,[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3].3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness WWI in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settkement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3[].3.[997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.!997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3.3.!997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 (4) SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 


9272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./966 in W.A. ४०. 297 of 7966 and 23.6. /967 in W.A. No.270 of /962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ४७४] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. A copy of the said minutes of proceedings is Ex.M5. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.!996 another 
settlement was entered between the SBI and All India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies 
arising up to December [994 in respect of subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so 
prepared were to be considered against vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said 
panels lapse. MW] states that it was also agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including 
part time attendants specially provided as leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non- 
messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3l.3.!997 shall be filled 
before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on September, 
996. Ex.M6 is the copy of the settlement dated 30.7.!996. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a 
memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels 
above mentioned will lapse on 3!.3.997. Ex.M7 is the copy of the memorandum of understanding and Ex.M8 is the 
copy of the statements giving the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, Ex.M9 is the copy of the statement of 
989 non- messenger panel, Ex.M0 is the copy of statement of 992 panel. Further, witness states that petitioner 
was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his turn did not come he 
could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the appointments were made 
strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI staff federation and as per 
seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given period. Further, ५४] 5९5 
petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the regular process of selection 
required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 240 days in any year in his 
entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were terminated from service by 
the bank. Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the temporary employees from 
the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there were no vacancies to absorb 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9273 


such employees. Thus, witness १४७४] has proved the documents 55.५] to Ex.M]2 and also contentions made in the 
counter. However, ४७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross 
examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness ५७४] as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 
3.3.997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. 
Moreover the witness MWI was re-examined by the Respondent and the witness MWI states that panels were 
expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the available vacancies were made. There was no 
termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were not utilized after the cut off date as the 
available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were not in the service of the bank as on the 
date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid testimony of the 0५७४] in re-examination in 
the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of the Workman that he was entitled for 
absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the basis of panel list is found not 
established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Sudarshanam Anil, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. September, 996 is justified. Hence, 
the Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 0"" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Sudarshanam Anil MWI: Sri K. Chandra Sekhar Goud 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI to 
Ex.W4: Photocopies of service certificates 
Ex.W5S: Photocopy of transfer certificate 
Ex.W6: Photocopy of caste certificate 
Ex.W7: Photocopy of employment card 
Ex.W8: Photostat copy of interview call letter 
Ex.W9: Photocopy of stay order 
Ex.W0: Photocopy of 992 panel list 
5.४४ |: Photocopy of legal notice. 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.M]: Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 


dt.7..87 


9274 


Ex.M2: 


Ex.M3: 


Ex.M4: 


Ex.MS5: 
Ex.M6: 


Ex.M7: 
Ex.M8: 
Ex.M9: 
+5. |0: 
+5. 0 | |: 
+5. | 2: 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.6.7.88 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.27.0.988 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.9..99] 


Photocopy of conciliation proceedings before the Regional Labour Commissioner(C) dt.9.6.995 


Photocopy of settlement between Respondent and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation 
dt.30.7.996 


Photocopy of Memorandum of understanding dt. 27..997 

Photocopy of statements giving the particulars of !989 messenger panel. 
Photocopy of statement of !989 Non-messenger panel 

Photocopy of statement of 992 panel 

Photocopy of order of Hon’ble High Court in WA No.86/98 dt. .5.98 
Photocopy of order in SLP No.l886-888 of 998 dated 0.8.98 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7753.—silaihra विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 


केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 55/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, एल.42025/04/2026-आई.आर,. ( Ft-)-80] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


9.0. 753.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 


Government hereby publishes the Award (No. LC. 55/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-i80] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 


HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 55/2002 


[Old ITID(C) No. 4/200! of Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam ] 
Between: 


Sri Thota Srinivasa Rao, 
S/o Ramamurthy, 
R/o Vizianagaram. .... Petitioner 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9275 


And 


The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Personnel section, 

Zonal office, Region -II, 


Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner ; Sri K.R. Prabhakar, Advocate 
For the Respondent : Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Thota Srinivasa Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential 
benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs 
as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court cum Industrial 
Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing 
ITID(C) No. 4/200I, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026/l/200l-IR(C.ID dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 55/2002. 


2 Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated !7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200] and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.209. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


9276 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.।268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger and worked from 8.4.88 to 3.3.997, 
and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 9 years. The Respondent has terminated 
services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 3.3.997. Further, it is submitted that the management of 
Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent 
appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after .7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after .7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7 
settlement, settlement dated 6.7.88 is 97४ settlement, settkement dated 27.0.88 is the an settlement, then 
settlement dated 9..9] is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement. In between there is 


minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95. That due to all these settlements which were extended by 
subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that 
it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will 
be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that 
employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2] of the 
Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, |997. The Hon’ble High Court 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9277 


also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, !99, and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3[.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! l982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.l982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


9278 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7.!.87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3].3.[997 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated l6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year !997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3|.3.997 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9279 


temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Ii.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec I8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period [987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated !7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after क्‍975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., |.7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 


9280 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.l2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as ७] and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to W4. Further, MWI has proved documents Ex.W5 to Ex.W7. Workman has 
filed photocopies of documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI and Ex.W4 are the service certificates. Ex.W5 is the letter to CGM (Per) dated 0.0.990. Ex.W6 is the 
letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary employees dt.l9.8.90. Ex.W7 is the 
letter from Government of India to Respondent 6.30.] |.67. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ५७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
one document, marked as Ex.MI i.e., the printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 
Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 4" settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 928] 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Workman Sri Thota 
Srinivasa Rao, a Messenger with effect from 3[.3.[997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 () of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
36. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3!..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3[.3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


9262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April 7963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 7966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section 7/6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6//). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section 76 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October /6, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9283 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3. [997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3!.3.!997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days’ 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within 2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


9284 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of /2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.997. The 
witness WWI in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 254 days in the Respondent organization from 
985 to 997. As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 8 of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner has to 
adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3.3.997. But as per the chief statement of witness ४१ै५७४।, vide Ex.WI he had worked continuously 
for 0 days in the branch during the year 997. Petitioner had worked vide for 76 days, vide Ex.W3 for 380 days, 
and vide Ex.W4 for 26] days. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9285 


days continuously in a calendar year of 42 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.997. 
However, the documents in evidence filed by the Petitioner do not corroborate the averment of the claim statement as 
these documents are not exhibited or proved by the statement of ४७] or any other witness’s evidence. Further, the 
perusal of the document goes to reveal that the certificates allegedly issued by Respondent which goes to reveal that 
the Petitioner had worked as a temporary messenger at the branch of the Respondent bank from 8.4.988 to 
3.3.997, do not support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year 
just preceding from the date of his termination ie., 3!.3.997. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
terminated in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or 
documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of १४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days 
continuously in any !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent 
bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 
240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.!997. Thus, the 
claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after 
termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not tenable. However the documents 
filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the 
Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did 
not file any document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non- 
messenger in the Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3] .३3.]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the I.D. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3!.3.997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from |.4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


9286 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 5" settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9287 


panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2./967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./9687 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. |The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained 7/5.8(|) of the 
I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3].3.]997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3].3.[997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.]997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MW] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “ He 
did not complete 240 days of service in any year. In pursuance of settlements between the union and the bank, even 
though who have not completed 240 days of service in a year, were also empanelled for being considered for 
appointment in future vacancies.” Although this witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above 
statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined 
by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the 
management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was 
engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. This witness has categorically stated that, “Some of the 
empanelled candidates were appointed on seniority basis and number of days.” This statement of witness MWI 
remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the 
Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required 
for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the 
Workman witness WW in his cross examination has admitted the fact that “ It is true that no juniors to me were 
given employment by the bank on regular basis.” Therefore, in view of the statement of WW in cross examination, 
the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 
Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 
wagers from the panel list [989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 
Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.]997. 


9268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, !947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.I.99 has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
ie., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3].3.[997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3. 997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.!996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness WWI in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 


[भाग II-—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9289 


employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3[.3.[997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7, therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ]४०.।9३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2" respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.68. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 


9290 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness MWI and ७०७४] in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. शफ०] states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MW = states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. १५७४] states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on .4.!997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a memorandum 
of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above 
mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. #ऋ. ५] contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the 
particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of 989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ५०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents contained in Ex.M] 
printed book and also contentions made in the counter. However, ७४] was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness 
MW' as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.[997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the 
Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness १४७७४] was re-examined by the Respondent 
and the witness MW] states that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the 
available vacancies were made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were 
not utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid 
testimony of the MW] in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of 
the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the 
basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Thota Srinivasa Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3].3.[997 is justified. Hence, the 


[भाग I]-—eave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 929] 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 

Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 8" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Thota Srinivasa Rao MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.W] to: 
Ex.W4: Photocopies of Service certificates 
Ex.WS: Photocopy of letter to CGM (Per) dated l0.0.990 


Ex.W6: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary 
employees dt.9.8.90 


Ex.W7: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India to Respondent त.30.] | .67. 
Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.MI: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7754.—siaihra विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
पंचाट (सन्दर्भ संख्या 54/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


fa. एल.42025/04/2026-आई आर. (बी-7)-79] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 754.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.54/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-79] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


9292 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 
Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 54/2002 
[Old ITID(C) No. 39/200! of Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam ] 


Between: 


Sri Tompala Somayya, 

S/o Surayya, 

Bituvada Village, 

Veeraghattam mandal, 

Srikakulam District. .... Petitioner 


And 


The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Personnel section, 

Zonal office, Region -II, 


Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri K.R. Prabhakar, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Tompala Somayya who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential 
benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs 
as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court cum Industrial 
Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing 
ITID(C) No. 39/200l, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!026/l/200l-IR(C.ID) dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 54/2002. 


Qs Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20I4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20l4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20I9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9293 


each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ४४.३.)२०.।268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/204 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger and worked from .9.987 to 
3i.2.987 and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 78 days. The Respondent has 
terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from ..!988. Further, it is submitted that the 
management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for 
permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity 
arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


9294 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7 
settlement, settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2™ settlement, settlement dated 27.0.88 is the 37 settlement, then 
settlement dated 9..9] is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement. In between there is 


minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95. That due to all these settlements which were extended by 
subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that 
it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will 
be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that 
employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2l of the 
Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, [99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3|.3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3.3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in 2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9295 


that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! 982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles [4,6 and 2] of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated [7.]].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after |..988 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year !997 despite there being vacancies. The 


9296 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, !997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated ..988 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!i.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period [987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99 as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to !994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., |.7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 


[भाग Il—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9297 


the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5 ए settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.]997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.!886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to W8. Further, ५७] has proved documents Ex.W9 to Ex.WIl. Workman 
has filed photocopies of documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


9298 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Ex.WI! to Ex.W7 are the service certificates. Ex.W8 is the employment notification. Ex.W9 is the letter to CGM 
(Per) dated 0.0.990. Ex.WI0 is the letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary 
employees dt.l9.8.90. Ex.WI] is the letter from Government of India to Respondent 6.30.][.87. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ५७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
one document, marked as Ex.MI i.e., the printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 
Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Workman Sri Tompala 
Somayya, a Messenger with effect from |..988 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99! and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 () of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
36. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- (२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from .4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of 992 will lapse by 3.3.[997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.997.” 


[भाग II—ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9299 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3I.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.!997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..!997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3.3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6//). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3!.3.997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 


9300 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, 7973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.]997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.!.988 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as WWI who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
..988 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 


Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 930] 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause () for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman in a calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
74.7. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and_ Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of 7964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of /2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 


9302 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


for a period of /2 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., ..988. The 
witness WW in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 78 days in the Respondent organization from 
.9.987 to 3I.2.987. As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner 
has to adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., ..988. But as per the chief statement of witness १ै०७४।, vide Ex.WI he had worked continuously 
for 75 days in the branch during the year 987. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he 
had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year of !2 months just preceding from the date of his termination 
i.e., ..988. However, the documents in evidence filed by the Petitioner do not corroborate the averment of the 
claim statement as these documents are not exhibited or proved by the statement of WWI or any other witness’s 
evidence. Further, the perusal of the documents goes to reveal that the certificates allegedly issued by Respondent 
which goes to reveal that the Petitioner had worked as a temporary messenger at the branch of the Respondent bank 
from .9.987 to I.l.988, do not support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously 
in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., l..l988. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner 
that he has been terminated in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated 
by his oral or documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not 
worked for 240 days continuously in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination in the Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary 
evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., l.!.!988. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing 
notice or payment in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, 947 is not 
tenable. However the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the 
Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability 
of work in branch. Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim 
for appointment as a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated ..988 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the LD. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., l..988. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.[997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.!997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from |.4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9303 


deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of ILD. Act, !947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules !957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, [997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3i.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


9304 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 57 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./9687 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in the 
settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature 
of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.8(/) of the ID. 
Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3!.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 
30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3[.3. [997 till last man absorbed has no 
legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December [994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MW] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “ He 
did not complete 240 days of service in any year. In pursuance of settlements between the union and the bank, even 
though who have not completed 240 days of service in a year, were also empanelled for being considered for 
appointment in future vacancies.” Although this witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above 
statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined 
by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the 
management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was 
engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. This witness has categorically stated that, “Some of the 
empanelled candidates were appointed on seniority basis and number of days.” This statement of witness /०७। 
remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the 
Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required 
for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the 
Workman witness WW in his cross examination has admitted the fact that “ It is true that no juniors to me were 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9305 


given employment by the bank on regular basis.” Therefore, in view of the statement of WW in cross examination, 
the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 
Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW] it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 
wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 
Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.[997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
ie., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article ॥4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


9306 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3.3.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.]997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3[|.3.[997., However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.2.994 and upto 3[.3.[997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.!996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3[].3.[997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.!997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3.3,]997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9307 


instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP २०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./966 in W.A. ४०. 297 of 7966 and 25.6. /967 in W.A. No.270 of /962. The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“ 49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ४७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ५७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MWI states that on 30.7.!996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All India 
SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of subordinate 
cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against vacancies 
arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. MW states that it was also agreed that 
all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as leave 
reserve will be filled before 3.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such posts 
sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus in 
both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on |.4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.!997 a memorandum of 
understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels above mentioned 
will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.M] contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving the particulars of 
989 non-messenger panel, statement of !989 non- messenger panel and statement of !992 panel. Further, witness 
states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were exhausted and his 
turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. All the 
appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI and SBI 
staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the given 
period. Further, MWI states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo the 
regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents contained in Ex.M] 
printed book and also contentions made in the counter. However, ४७] was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness 
MW/ as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3. [997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the 


9306 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness १४७४] was re-examined by the Respondent 
and the witness MWI states that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the 
available vacancies were made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were 
not utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid 
testimony of the MW] in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of 
the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the 
basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Tompala Somayya, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. ..988 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 8" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Tompala Somayya MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.W] to: 
Ex.W7: Photocopies of Service certificates 
Ex.W8: Photocopy of employment notification 
Ex.W9: Photocopy of letter to CGM (Per) dated l0.0.990 


Ex.Wl0: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary 
employees dt.9.8.90 


Ex.WIil: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India to Respondent dt.30..87. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7755.—silaihre विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के 
Gare (सन्दर्भ संख्या 53/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[a. Wel.42025/0I/2026-aiTg आर. (At-I)-78] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9309 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 755.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (No.LC. 53/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 

[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (8-)- 78] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 


Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 53/2002 
[Old ITID(C) No. 38/200! of Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam ] 


Between: 

Sri Pitani Venkataramu, 

S/o Abbaji, 

R/o Kakinada. .... Petitioner 


And 


l. The Chief General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
LHO, bank street, 
Hyderabad. 


2. The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Personnel section, 

Zonal office, RTC Complex, 


2ns floor, Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Pitani Venkataramu who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has 
filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank 
of India seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential 
benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs 
as this court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court cum Industrial 
Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing 
ITID(C) No. 38/200l, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-026/l/200l-IR(C.ID) dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 53/2002. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 


93]0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20I4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/204 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in W.A.No.l268 of 20I4 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger and worked from 988 to 989, and 
has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 2 years. The Respondent has terminated services 
of Workman by oral orders with effect from April, !989. Further, it is submitted that the management of 
Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for permanent 
appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.li.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.!975. B) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99l. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 93i] 


held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.|, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated !6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7 
settlement, settlement dated 6.7.88 is ae settlement, settkement dated 27.0.88 is the 37: settlement, then 
settlement dated 9..9] is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement. In between there is 


minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95. That due to all these settlements which were extended by 
subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that 
it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will 
be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that 
employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2! of the 
Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto !992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.]997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3].3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


93]2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in 2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! l982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99! wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles [4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated [7.].67 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 933 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlkement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3.3.97 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter II of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated April, !989 is unjust, 
illegal, violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the 
Workman and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.!l.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec I8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period [987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99 as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 


93]4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5"" settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.]2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3!.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.l2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3.5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 935 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W]. Workman has filed photocopy of document Ex.W], the service certificate, in 
support of his claim. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
two documents, marked as ४5.0] and Ex.M2. Ex.M| is the statement showing the number of days the Petitioner 
worked during the relevant period. Ex.M2 is the printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 
Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘t settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Workman Sri Pitani 
Venkataramu, a Messenger with effect from April, 989 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 


Findings:- 

25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99 and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 () of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
36. Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 5" settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 


936 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from .4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.[997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.]997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.[997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3[.3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6//). 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section 76 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(/) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(7) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3.[997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 937 


that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section /6 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /973, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3!.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3.3.997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on April, !989 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as 7५७४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
April, 989 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman 
on merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


938 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (३ for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of 2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 939 


Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of I2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., April, 989. The 
witness WW in chief examination has stated that he had worked in the Respondent organization from 988 to 989. 
AS per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, |947, the Petitioner has to adduce the evidence 
of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., April, 989. 
But as per the chief statement of witness १५७], vide Ex.WI he had worked continuously for 90 days in the branch 
during the years 988- [989. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a calendar year of [2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., April, 989. 
However, the documents in evidence filed by the Petitioner do not corroborate the averment of the claim statement as 
these documents are not exhibited or proved by the statement of १४५७] or any other witness’s evidence. Further, the 
perusal of the document goes to reveal that the certificate allegedly issued by Respondent which goes to reveal that 
the Petitioner had worked as a temporary messenger at the branch of the Respondent bank from November, 988 to 
April, 989, do not support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar 
year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., April, !989. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has 
been terminated in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral 
or documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of ४१४७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 
days continuously in any !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the 
Respondent bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he 
had worked for 240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., April, 
989. Thus, the claim of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment 
in lieu after termination, in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, l947 is not tenable. However 
the documents filed by the Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to 
reveal that the Workman had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. 
Workman did not file any document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as 
a non-messenger in the Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated April, 989 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the I.D. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., April, 989. 


9320 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.[997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 B of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated 6.8.!990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 932[ 


cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.!2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /962, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2./967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.”’ 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. |The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained 7/5.8(|) of the 
I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3.3.997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3].3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 4995 to December !996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3].3,.[997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3l.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


9322 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness १७५४४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “ The 
workman did not complete 240 days of service in anyl2 calendar months. The workman was empanelled for being 
being considered for regularization of service. The empanelment was on the basis of settlement reached between the 
Management of State Bank of India and the Staff Federation.” Although this witness was cross examined by the 
Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness ४४] 
was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that she has been removed 
from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness ५७७] in his chief statement has stated that, 
the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. This witness has categorically stated 
that, “on the basis of the vacancies available, the services of temporary employees were regularized basing on their 
length of service upto 3.7.988.” This statement of witness 0५७४] remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not 
cross examine the witness ५७४७] on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, 
failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given 
regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused 
regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the 
Workman witness WW] it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between 
Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of 
work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days 
than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular 
appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settlement and violation of 
seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has 
given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list !989 and [992 in 
breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make 
appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the 
Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of 
workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3].3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section !8(/) of I.D. Act, 947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9323 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article ॥4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 709 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.[997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3.997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3[].3.[997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and ॥6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


9324 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ७०.।१३/997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 27 respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //,/966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /967 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ५७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settkement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, ४] states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. ७४७४] states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on .4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a 
memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels 
above mentioned will lapse on 3!.3.997. Ex.MI contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving 
the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of !989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9325 


and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness ४७४] has proved the documents contained in Ex.M] 
printed book and also contentions made in the counter. However, MWI was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness 
MW/ as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.[997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the 
Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness ७४] was re-examined by the Respondent 
and the witness ४७४] states that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the 
available vacancies were made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were 
not utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid 
testimony of the MW] in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of 
the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the 
basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Pitani Venkataramu, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. April, [989 is justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 8" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri Pitani Venkataramu MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 


Ex.WI: Service certificate 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of service details of Petitioner 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


9326 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4756.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट 
(सन्दर्भ संख्या 56/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[a. एल.42025/04/2026-आई.आर.( Ft-I)-77] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 756.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.56/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-I2025/04/2026- IR (B-I)-77] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


In The Central Government Industrial Tribunal Cum Labour Court At Hyderabad 
Present: Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 9" day of June, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 56/2002 
[Old ITID(C) No. 42/200! of Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam ] 


Between: 

Sri K. Appa Rao, 

S/o Hanuman, 
D.No.36-95-00, 
Kapparanda kancharapalem, 


Visakhapatnam — 530 008 .... Petitioner 
And 
L. The Chief General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Bank Street, 
Hyderabad. 
2: The Deputy General Manager , 
State Bank of India, 
Zonal office, 
Visakhapatnam — 530 00]. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent: Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri K. Appa Rao who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India 
seeking for reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential benefits 
such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this 
court may deem fit. Earlier Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court cum Industrial 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9327 


Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for adjudication and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing 
ITID(C) No. 42/200l, as per orders of Central Government vide Lr.No.H-!!026/l/200l-IR(C.ID) dated 
8.0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC No. 56/2002. 


2. Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 7.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/204 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200! and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20i4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 
for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in W.A.No.l268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement dated 
20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger and worked from 8.!0.986 to March, 
997, and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about Il years. The Respondent has 
terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from 3!.3.997. Further, it is submitted that the 
management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for 
permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such opportunity 
arises. 


9328 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4. That on !7.!i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in |2 months or less after .7.!975. B) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after !.7.975. C) (i) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after |.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause 0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7.!.87 was modified vide second agreement dated !6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the 7 
settlement, settlement dated 6.7.88 is ae settlement, settkement dated 27.0.88 is the a4 settlement, then 
settlement dated 9..9] is 4" settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement. In between there is 


minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95. That due to all these settlements which were extended by 
subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that 
it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will 
be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that 
employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2! of the 
Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 
to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7.!.87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated l6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto !992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3|.3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9329 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated 7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in 2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in !2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after l.! !982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after 975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 
covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9.!.!99! wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99 will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9..!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 


9330 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7.!.87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after 3 ].3. [997 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 4997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, 997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated 3.3.997 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 
Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, !947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Ii.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec !8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period [987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as 987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99 as contemplated under the first settlement dated 7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 


[भाग I—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 933| 


by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9.!.9 herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as 989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., .7.975 to 3.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, [957, which is hereinafter called as 5"" settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.!994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of 2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 
candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 


9332 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles 4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.W] to W4. Workman has filed photocopies of documents in support of his claim 
which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI to Ex.W4 are the service certificates. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ०७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
two documents, marked as 75.७] and Ex.M2. Ex.M] is the service details of Petitioner and Ex.M2 is the printed 
book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for regularization of services of the 
temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 
24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 

I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Workman Sri K. Appa Rao, 
a Messenger with effect from 3[.3.997 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..I99l and 
30.7.996, minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed 


between the State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and 8 () of 
ID. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9333 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
36, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[२) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3].3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.[997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., l989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.]997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.!997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3..997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 
wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3[.3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8() of ILD. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June /966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6//). 


4. Now the Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(/) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47/(7) of the A.P. Shops and 


9334 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Establishments Act, /966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3].3. [997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section 76 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 
improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9/3, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 () of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on 3].3.997 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9335 


Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as 7५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
3.3.997 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter, -- 


() a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (7) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 
(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


9336 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and Chapter 
VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., 3.3.!997. The 
witness WWI in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 58 days in the Respondent organization from 
986 to 997. As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 B of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner has to 
adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., 3.3.997. But as per the chief statement of witness १ै५७४।, vide Ex.W! he had worked continuously 
for 74 days in the branch during the years 986. Further, Ex.W2 shows that he had worked for 200 days, Ex.W3 
shows that he had worked for 200 days, and Ex.W4 shows that he had worked from 996 to 997 for I8 days. 
Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar 
year of 2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3.3.!997. However, the documents in 
evidence filed by the Petitioner do not corroborate the averment of the claim statement as these documents are not 
exhibited or proved by the statement of WW or any other witness’s evidence. Further, the perusal of the document 
goes to reveal that _ the certificate allegedly issued by Respondent which goes to reveal that the Petitioner had 
worked as a temporary messenger at the branch of the Respondent bank from 8.0.86 to 3.3.997, do not support 
the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year just preceding from the 
date of his termination ie., 3l.3.!997. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been terminated in 
contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or documentary 
evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of १४०७] that the Workman had not worked for 240 days continuously 
in any [2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent bank. 
Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 3!.3.!997. Thus, the claim of 
the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, in 
contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, !947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9337 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated 3] .३3.]997 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. l.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the I.D. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., 3.3.[997. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from .4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from .4.!997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.!997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from |.4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 
management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 8 of the .D. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8.!.993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated l6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 


9338 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8() of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules [957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.l988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3l.l2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on /4.6. /9862, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from /.6.4962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./967 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2, /966, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in 
the settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding 
nature of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8() of the 
I.D. Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3].3,[997 in view of terms of settlement 
dated 30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has 
no legal force and same is untenable. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9339 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3l.2.994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December !994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3i.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness MW in chief statement has given the evidence that, “ It is 
not true to say that bank has removed the Workman from service by taking care to see that he did not complete 240 
days of the service continuously within a period of 2 months. The engagement of the service of the workmen was 
need based and there is no continuous availability of leave vacancies for engaging his services.” Although this 
witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above statement of the management witness in chief remained 
uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the 
Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the management illegally is untenable. Further, witness /४। 
in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. 
This witness has categorically stated that, “The last person whose services was regularised has completed 77 days of 
employment during the crucial period as per settlement whereas the Workman herein worked for 65.33 days during 
that period.” This statement of witness MWI remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the 
witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil 
eligibility criteria of working days as required for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the 
employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the Workman witness WWI in his cross examination has admitted the 
fact that he do not know whether any junior to him were regularised in the services. Further, १४७४] states that he do 
not know particulars of the settlement reached between the management and staff union. Therefore, in view of the 
statement of WWI in cross examination, the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the 
Respondent management illegally, is untenable. Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is 
clear that the panel was prepared in terms of various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank 
of India and State Bank of India and it was prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary 
employees. Further, the Workman himself admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were 
included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not 
having any document to show that any person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given 
appointment in the bank. Therefore, the allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by 
the bank from the panel list in breach of the terms of the settkement and violation of seniority of panel list is not 
proved by this evidence of ४१४५४], Thus, there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the 
temporary employees as well as daily wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the 
temporary employees in the list. There is no evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any 
permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent 
Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen 
in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3|.3.997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.!997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and 8(.) of I.D. Act, !947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.[996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.I988 and 9.I.99I has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


9340 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under: - 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /॥4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article ॥4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3.[997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3.3.997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3].3,[997, However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3].3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3!.2.994 and upto 3.3.997 as 
settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness WW] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3[].3.[997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles ।4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 934[ 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ७०.।१३/।997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./966 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /966 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 
appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ५७४] and MWI in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, MWI states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 


9342 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3!.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MW] = states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December !994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. MW states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on .4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a 
memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels 
above mentioned will lapse on 3.3.997. Ex.MI contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving 
the particulars of 989 non-messenger panel, statement of !989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, MWI states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, MW] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness MWI has proved the documents contained in Ex.M2 
printed book and also contentions made in the counter. However, ५४] was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness 
MW' as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3[.3. [997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the 
Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness ४७४] was re-examined by the Respondent 
and the witness ४७४] states that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the 
available vacancies were made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were 
not utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid 
testimony of the MW] in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of 
the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the 
basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri K. Appa Rao, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. 3.3.997 is justified. Hence, the Petitioner 
is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 9" day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
WWI: Sri K. Appa Rao MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
Ex.WI to: 


Ex.W4: Photocopies of Service certificates 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9343 


Documents marked for the Respondent 
Ex.M]: Photocopy of statement showing working details of Petitioner. 


Ex.M2: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7757.—silaihra विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट 
(सन्दर्भ संख्या 20/2023) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं., Vel.42025/0/2026-ang.aie.( aT-I)-776] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 757.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.20/2023) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-76] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present:- Sri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 5" day of July, 2026 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE No. 20/2023 


Between: 


Sri Pulimi Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy, 

6-3-234-2, Ramalingapursm, Nellore, 

Spsr Nellore, 

Andhra Pradesh-524003 ee Petitioner 


AND 


State Bank of India, 

State Bank of India, Town Branch, Nellore, 

Spsr Nellore, 

Andhra Pradesh-52400) 00 ee Respondent 


Appearances: 


For the Petitioner : Sri S. Suman, Advocate 


For the Respondent : Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 


9344 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 
The Government of India, Ministry of Labour by its order No. 7/2/2023-BI dated 7.03.2023 referred the 
following dispute under section !0()(d) of the ILD. Act, 947 for adjudication to this Tribunal between the 
management of State Bank of India, Town Branch, Nellore and their workman. The reference is, 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Sri Pulimi 
Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy, Ex-Messenger is legal and justified? If not, what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


The reference is numbered in this Tribunal as I.D. No 20/2023 and notices were issued to the parties 
concerned. 


2. On the date case is fixed for Petitioner evidence, Petitioner remained absent. Despite sufficient opportunity 
accorded to the Petitioner, he did not adduce any evidence in support of his claim, opportunity closed. Hence, a No- 
Claim Award is passed. Reference is answered accordingly. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, P.A., corrected and signed by me on this the 5" day of 
July, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 
NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7758.—silaihre विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार भारतीय स्टेट बैंक के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट 
(सन्दर्भ संख्या 50/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


[सं, Wel.42025/0i/2026-ailg stk. (St-I)-75] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 758.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (.No.LC.50/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, Hyderabad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of State Bank 
of India and their workmen, 


[No. L-2025/0/2026- IR (B-I)-75] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 


Dated the 8" day of June, 2026 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9345 


INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 50/2002 
[Old ITID(C) No. 32/200! of Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam ] 
Between: 


Sri Suragana Neelayya, 
S/o Appanna, 
R/o Vizianagaram. .... Petitioner 


And 


The Dy. General Manager, 
State Bank of India, 
Personnel section, 

Zonal office, Region -II, 


Visakhapatnam. ..... Respondent 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Sri Macherla Rangaiah, Advocate 
For the Respondent : Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 
AWARD 


Sri Suragana Neelayya who worked as Messenger (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this 
petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 against the Respondents State Bank of India seeking for 
reinstatement into service as Messenger/Sweeper duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of 
service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deem fit. Earlier 
Petitioner has filed this dispute before the Labour Court cum Industrial Tribunal, Visakhapatnam for adjudication 
and later the same has been transferred to this Tribunal bearing ITID(C) No. 32/200], as per orders of Central 
Government vide Lr.No.H-!026/I/200l-IR(C.ID) dated I8.!0.200 and registered, numbered in this Tribunal as LC 
No. 50/2002. 


2: Before unfolding the factual matrix of the instant industrial dispute it would be apposite to have a bird eye 
view of a chequered history of the instant industrial dispute. Earlier instant industrial dispute along with the batch 
cases was decided by this Tribunal vide common award dated 7.5.2005 and the reference was answered in favour of 
the Respondent and against the Workman. That said common award dated 47.5.2005 was challenged by the 
aggrieved Workmen in various Writ petition No.6470/20I4 along with batch of writ petitions before the Hon’ble 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh and Hon’ble High Court vide its’ judgement dated 23.6.204 allowed all batch of writ 
petitions and set aside the common award dated 7.5.2005 passed in ID No.222 of 200 and other batch of ID cases 
by Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, Hyderabad and the Respondent management of State 
Bank of India was directed to reengage the Writ Petitioners in position, which they have been occupying prior to 
their termination and further directed to consider their cases for regularization as and when the substantive vacancy 
arises. This judgement dated 23.6.20l4 of Hon’ble High Court of AP, passed in WP No.6470/20l4 and batch 
petitions was challenged by Respondent management before the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No. 268 of 
20l4. The aforesaid Writ Appeals No.l268/20l4 and other Writ Appeals were decided by Division Bench of High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh by a common judgement dated 20.3.20l9. Hon’ble High Court in aforesaid Writ Appeal 
was pleased to pass the order which is extracted as below:- 


“ 7. Hearing the learned senior counsel for the SBI and the learned senior counsel for the contesting unofficial 
Respondents, we see that while the learned single Judge was justified in setting aside the award af the Tribunal, the 
proper course to be adopted was to remit all the cases to the Tribunal. This we say for reasons more than one. Firstly, 
in such matters, claims have to be decided on individual basis, as different persons have different claims as to the 
length of officiation or discharge of duties and functions; quality of engagement, drawings, accounting of the post for 
each one of them, who have worked etc. All these issues will not be the same in all the cases. Therefore, each case 
ought to have been directed to be decided by the Tribunal afresh on individual basis. The second and most important 
aspect is the learned single Judge has in one go ordered re-employment of all the workmen. This is not a relief that 
could have been granted without answering the individual issues; each issue relating to each case could not have 
been decided by the writ Court within the format of its adjudication procedures and scope. The adjudicating body, 
which has to do that activity, is the Industrial Tribunal. Therefore, we are of the view that while we would sustain the 
order of the learned singe Judge insofar as it interfered and sets aside the award of the Tribunal, the further findings 
and directions, issued through the impugned order have to go and the individual cases have to be sent back for 
consideration of the Tribunal. Such further procedure before the Tribunal will have to be carried forward with the 
materials already on record and also by affording an opportunity to the persons, who have claims as well as the 
management to place their rival contentions and further material before the Tribunal. The learned counsel appearing 


9346 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


for the workmen are justified in pointing out that enormous delay has already happened and further action by the 
Tribunal in this line may be expedited. 


9. In the result, these writ appeals are ordered; 


(4) affirming the impugned common order of the learned single Judge to the extent it sets aside the common award 
dated 77.05.200935 of the Industrial Tribunal; 


(2) the further findings and directions issued through the impugned common order are vacated: 


(3) all the matters shall be remitted to the Industrial Tribunal with a direction to dispose of them within an outer limit 
of five (5) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order; and, 


, 


(4) the parties to make appearance before the Tribunal on the given date.’ 


Thus, in view of the above direction of Hon’ble High Court of Andhra Pradesh in ७.७.)२०.268 of 204 and batch 
cases. This Tribunal has taken up the matter of industrial dispute for hearing and deciding it afresh in view of the 
aforesaid guidelines laid down by the Hon’ble High Court in Writ Appeal No.l268/20l4 vide judgement 
dated 20.3.09. 


3. The factual matrix of instant industrial dispute as narrated by the Workman in his claim statement are that, 
the Workman joined in the service of the management institution as Messenger from .7.!975 to 3.7.988, and 
5.0.95 to 3].3.96 and has rendered unblemished service spreading over a period of about 6 years. The Respondent 
has terminated services of Workman by oral orders with effect from |.4.996. Further, it is submitted that the 
management of Respondent bank decided to give a chance to temporarily employed personnel “found suitable for 
permanent appointment” by wait- listing them by offering permanent appointment or waitlisting till such 
opportunity arises. 


4. That on !7.i.987 a settlement was reached between All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and the 
Management of State Bank of India - settlement one, under this settlement three categories of employees were 
listed. That is, A) those who have completed 240 days in 2 months or less after .7.975. 8) those who have 
completed 270 days in any continuous block of 36 calendar months after .7.975. C) 0) those who have completed 
minimum of 30 days aggregate temporary service in any calendar year after !.7.975 or (ii) 70 days aggregate 
temporary service in continuous block of 36 months after |.7.975. 


5. The persons who satisfied in all the above 4 categories were to be interviewed by a selection committee and 
the said selection committee would determine the suitability of the said candidate for permanent appointment. 
Therefore, the bank prescribed certain qualifications and from among the candidates satisfying the qualifications the 
suitable candidates were enlisted by a selection committee. The Clause 7 of the said agreement provided with the 
selected candidate would be wait listed in order of their respective categorization and the selected panel would be 
valid upto December, 99. Clause l0 of the settlement specifically provided that henceforth. “there will be no 
temporary appointments in the subordinate cadre”, except on a restrictive basis in the specified category, “from 
amongst empanelled candidates as per existing guidelines of the bank”. The Workman further submits that 
consequent upon the said agreement and the draft, a notification was issued in the newspapers. The last date for 
responding to the advertisement was 30.8.!988. A written examination followed by viva-voce in May, !989 was 
held. A selected panel was prepared, as per Clause 7 of the agreement, ie. Settlement No.l, the selected panel was to 
be valid upto December, !99!, the Workman submits that circular was issued on 26.4.9! by the said letter it is 
mentioned that the terms of the agreement dated 7..87 was modified vide second agreement dated 6.7.88 was 
entered into between the parties. In terms of the said agreement a chance was to be given, “to all eligible temporary 
employees for permanent appointments. The appointments were against the vacancies likely to arise during the 
years 995-96, circular made it clear that in view of the enormity of the problem an extension of the currency of the 
panel, eligible temporary employees who have been empanelled could not appear in the earlier interviews and have 
been pursuing their cases thereafter, “will be given another chance to appear for interview”. 


6. Workman submits that there were total five settlements. The settlement dated 7..87 is the [7 
settlement, settlement dated 6.7.88 is 2704 settlement, settlkement dated 27.0.88 is the 378 settlement, then 
settlement dated 9..9] is 47 settlement and settlement dated 30.7.96 is 5" settlement. In between there is 


minutes of conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.95. That due to all these settlements which were extended by 
subsequent settlements thereby created reasonable expectations in the list of the selected candidates arose with that 
it’s a question of time their appointments or services would be regularized in the services of the bank. The 
Workman was working with the bank on temporary basis was under the bonafide hope that sooner his services will 
be regularized with the bank. He is thereby closed all his options elsewhere. It is needless to point out that 
employing person to whom hope of employment in substantial terms was made is a facet of Article 2] of the 
Constitution of India. 


7. Further Workman submits that the Government of India issued Circular No. F-3/3/l04/87-IR, dated 
6.8.990. Under said circular the chief Executives of all public sector banks including the Management herein were 
specifically instructed that until the problem of existing temporary employees is fully resolved, no bank is permitted 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9347 


to make any permanent appointments. That some of the persons similarly situated like this Workman aggrieved by 
the inaction on the part of the management of the bank is not regularizing their services from out of the selected panel 
and not clearly focusing the vacancy position, filed W.P. No. 494/97 before Hon’ble High court of A.P.. It is 
specifically averred in the said writ petition that the Management of the bank had failed to implement the settlement 
and that it violates the various fundamental rights guaranteed under the constitution of India. The Hon’ble High 
court of A.P .. by order dated 5.3.97 directed the bank to implement the settlement as amended from time to time. It 
also directed the bank to carry out the terms of settlement before the expiry of March, !997. The Hon’ble High 
Court also recorded finding that the Bank cannot escape its liability of enforcement of the Settlement. In view of the 
directions given by the High Court all candidates whose names appeared in the select panels prepared on the basis of 
the agreement entered into on !7..87 under which the panel was valid upto December, 99], and on the basis of a 
settlement dated 27.0.988 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 under which the panel was valid 
upto December, 999. The other agreement dated 6.7.988 under which the panel was valid upto 992 and on the 
basis of the settlement dated 27.0.998 whereby the panels were made alive upto 3].3.[997 were under the bonafide 
impression that their cases will be considered for regularization and were living on the basis of the said reasonable 
expectation. Unfortunately, contrary to the aforesaid directions given by the High Court and contrary to the 
settlements entered into between the parties, the bank issued proceedings dated 25.3.]997, dated 27.3.997 and 
3.3.997 instructing the various authorities of the Management not to continue the temporary employees those who 
are in services of the bank from .4.97. The said order was followed by the Management. Aggrieved by the said 
action the Workman herein and similarly situated candidates have filed a writ petition before the Hon'ble High Court 
and by way of Writ Petition No.9206/97 seeking a declaration that the proceedings issued by the Deputy General 
Manager and the Assistant General Manager (Respondents 3,4 and 5 therein) on 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and 3].3.97 as 
illegal and also non-continuance of the Workmen therein in service by absorbing them in the services of the bank as 
violative of Section 2(p) and 8(.) read with Rule 58 of Central Rules and sought for specific direction to the bank to 
absorb them in service. 


8. Further, Workman submits that in the counter affidavit filed in Writ Petition No.9206/97, the bank has 
submitted that it has about 805 branches in Andhra Pradesh alone. It has stated that due to exigencies of 
circumstances and on account of the urgent need in its banks, it employed temporary employees in subordinate cadre. 
It is pertinent to mention that it does not state the urgent or need or the nature of temporary employees that it had 
engaged. Enquiry into the same would reveal that the stand taken by the bank either on the ground of urgent need or 
of temporary employees is a facade to perpetuate unfair labour practice. It is designed to on the one hand, keep the 
employed in the erroneous zone of hope and on the other to ensure that benefits that a model employer will extend 
under various statutes to its employees is not required to be borne out by the bank. A reading of the counter affidavit 
would show that the bank would opines that being just fair and reasonable are which obviously is reprehensible and is 
a facet of unfair labour practice. 


9. The Workman submits that the bank had referred in its counter affidavit to three settlements dated ]7..87, 
6.7.88 and 27.0.88. The bank in the guise of extending the benefits of the circular of Government dated 6.8.90 
stated in its counter affidavit that as follows: 


"Government of India, vide its letter dated 6.8.990, issued guidelines to all the public sector banks with regard to 
recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. The said guidelines were issued to 
implement on the lines of the approach paper on the issue provided by a committee constituted in this regard. The 
Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow the provisions laid down in 
the approach paper. 


The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary employees who had put in not less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 consecutive Months and who are entitled to benefit of Section 25-F may be decided by 
entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less than 
240 days of service in |2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the Management 
so desired, they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. Para 6(h), it is mentioned 
that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days after |.! l982 would be 
eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a settlement in respect 
of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 or more days, the bank by way of further concession entered 
into settlements Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days. As such, it could be Seen that the 
settlements are more beneficial to the temporary employees concerned. The approach paper also specify at para 6(c) 
that the banks would provide one time opportunity to all the temporary employees and for that purpose temporary 
employees worked in the bank on or after |.l.!982 could be considered for re-employment in terms of the scheme. 
The Respondents have gone further wherein even persons working after [975 were also considered. 


As could be seen from the above, there was a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide 
permanent employment for as many as possible subject to availability of the vacancies. 


It is further submitted that at para 6(k) of the approach paper, it was made clear that this would be one time 
exercise in full and final settlement of all the aims and disputes for the past period in respect of temporary workmen 


9348 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


covered by the settlement. This would mean that the Government of India guidelines would cover only those persons 
who were temporarily employed for the period specified therein and not otherwise. As such, it is submitted that the 
Respondents have not only followed the Government of India guidelines but in fact covered cases of the employees 
who had worked for less than 90 days. As such, question of violation does not arise and in any case those were only 
broad guidelines and not directives". 


0. The Workman submits that the bank also referred a subsequent settlement dated 9..99] wherein there is a 
clause to the effect- that the panel of temporary employees and the panel of daily wage employees will be operated to 
a particular period. Therefore, their cases will not be considered. The Management herein relying upon this settlement 
in their impugned action. It is submitted that even the settlement dated 9..99] will not empower the management 
to terminate the services of the temporary employees who are working in the bank services like the Workman herein 
as it does not specify the termination of the employees. In fact there are so many vacancies wherein the Management 
has engaged several new persons as temporary messengers/ attendars/ sweepers etc., even after the judgment of 
Hon’ble High Court without considering the cases of the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein. It is 
submitted inspite of engaging fresh candidates as is now being done by the Management they would have continued 
the similarly situated candidates like the Workman herein in the services of the bank and consider their cases for 
absorption in view of the circulars issued by Central Government as well as the directions of this Hon'ble Court in 
Writ Petition No.494/97, dated 5.3.97. In view of the circulars issued by the Central Government, the Management 
should not have relied upon the settlement dated 9.!.!99!. Hence, the impugned action of the Management is illegal, 
unjust, violative of fundamental rights such as Articles l4,6 and 2 of the Constitution of India. 


Il. The Workman submits that in W.P. No.494/97 filed by the union of temporary employees where in they 
have complained about the non- implementation of the settlements arrived between the parties and sought for 
absorption. Such employees in the bank services on permanent basis before the date fixed for carrying out the terms 
of settlement, the Court held that the members of the union had been empanelled in the list, they were not regularized 
and the time was going to run out to the near future and the Respondent bank and its officers cannot escape from the 
liability of enforcing the settlement which has been reached and therefore directed that the bank and the officers shall 
implement the settlement dated 7.!.87 as amended from time to time before the expiry of 3.3.97. 


2. Further, it is submitted that in the clause of Settlement it is specifically mentioned that the workmen to be 
absorbed/appointed in the bank prohibiting any temporary appointments subsequent to the date of settlement even the 
authorities want to make temporary appointments that should be made only from among the empanelled can be 
appointed either for temporary vacancy or permanent vacancy except from among the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman and that should be continued till they are absorbed. The management committed unfair labour practices 
and terminated the services of the candidates with effect from |.4.997 which is arbitrary, discriminatory, contrary to 
their own guidelines and violative of the constitutional provisions which are guaranteed in Chapter-III of the 
Constitution of India. 


3. The Workman submits that it is strange as to how the panels were allowed to lapse by a so-called 
Memorandum of Understanding dated 25.2.997, that the action of terminating such employees like the 
Workman by virtue of an impugned oral proceedings without implementing the settlement would be illegal and unfair 
labour practice which cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. That the discontinuance of the Workman after |.4.996 
who had served in the bank in any capacity amounts to retrenchment. It could not have been done without any notice 
and it violates Sec.25FF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 and the said action is violative of principles of natural 
justice guaranteed under Chapter III of the Constitution of India. This amounts to retrenchment without one month's 
notice and taken in view of such notice. Thus, the main proceedings issued by the Respondent is without 
jurisdiction and is arbitrary, illegal and therefore liable to be quashed. That the alleged Memorandum of 
Understanding dated 27.2.97 does not own any legal entity, as the said Memorandum of Understanding is not 
published anywhere to brought to the notice of the Workman whose rights are being affected. It is submitted that 
Management did not adhere to the procedure envisaged by the Central Government in its' instructions dated 6.8.90 
in the year |995. The same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The 
management has followed the procedure of calling candidates through Employment exchange instead of giving 
chance to the empanelled candidates like the Workman here. It is pertinent to mention here that the Respondent 
Management sent letters to the all similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month of June, !997, 
subsequent to the passing of impugned termination orders. After knowing the facts that the candidates are litigating, 
the Management refused to engage these candidates. It is once again reiterated that the panels are meant for 
absorption but not for termination. It was the duty of the Management to engage the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular vacancies. Hence, the action of 
the Respondent Management terminating the services of the Workman by oral order dated .4.996 is unjust, illegal, 
violative of principles of natural justice and hence, the Management be directed to reinstate and absorb the Workman 
and to grant all incidental and consequential benefits. 


4. Per contra, Respondent had filed counter and made a contentions that the reference is not tenable and 
contrary to the provisions of I.D. Act, 947. Respondent submitted that to tide over severe sub-ordinate staff 
constraints which arose out of leave vacancies, exigencies, etc., and also owning to the restrictions imposed by the 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9349 


Government of India/Reserve Bank of India on intake of staff, the Respondent bank used to engage sub-ordinate staff 
like messengers, sweepers, sweeper cum water boys, etc., depending on the availability of work on purely temporary 
basis for the smooth and uninterrupted functioning of the branches. It is submitted that the All India State Bank of 
India Staff Federation which represents majority of the employees in the State Bank of India comprising about 98% of 
the work force as its' members espoused the cause of temporary employees who have put in less than 240 days of 
temporary service in !2 calendar months in the bank and who were ineligible for any protection under Industrial 
Disputes Act, 947 to give a chance for being considered for absorption and permanent appointments. 


5. Discussions were held and on 7.Ii.987 an agreement was signed between the federation and the 
Management bank under Sec. 2(p) read with Sec 8(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957. A copy of the said settlement dated !7..87 which may be herein after 
referred as first settlement is filed and 4 categories were made as it has already been mentioned in the claim statement 
above, it need not be repeated here. In the first settlement, it was agreed that the temporary employees as categorized 
would be given a chance for being considered for permanent appointment in the bank's service against the vacancies 
which are likely to arise during the period [987 to 99!. On 6.7.88 second settlement was arrived between the 
Federation and the Bank whereby it was agreed to substitute the period of consideration of vacancies as !987 to 992 
in place of 987 to 99] as contemplated under the first settlement dated !7..987. This is the second settlement. 
A 3™ settlement was entered into on 27.0.88 and it was agreed that the bank's service against the vacancies likely to 
arise from 988 to 992 was to be considered. Government of India vide its letter dated 6.8.90 issued guidelines to 
all the public sector banks with regard to recruitment and absorption of temporary employees in public sector banks. 
The said guidelines were issued to implement on the lines of approach paper on the issue provided by a committee 
constituted in this regard. Government of India guidelines made it clear that all the public sector banks may follow 
the provisions laid down in the approach paper. The approach paper specified that the cases of temporary service in 
2 consecutive months and who are entitled to benefit of Sec.25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 may be decided 
by entering into a settlement with the representative union. In respect of temporary employees who had put in less 
than 240 days of service in l2 consecutive months or less, a settlement could be avoided and however if the 
Management so desired they could enter into a conciliation settlement with the representative union. In para. 6(h) it 
is mentioned that only those temporary employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days after 
..82 would be eligible for considering under the scheme. Although the Government guidelines envisaged for a 
settlement in respect of employees who had put in temporary service of 90 days or more days, the bank by way of a 
further concession entered into settlements. Even in respect of those who had put in less than 90 days and also the 
bank went a step further and said those persons who are working after !975 were also considered. Hence, there was 
a genuine effort on the part of the Respondent bank to provide as many as possible jobs subject to the availability of 
the vacancies. However, para 6 (k) of the approach paper made it clear that it is a one time, exercise in full and final, 
settlement of all the claims and disputes for the past period, in respect of temporary workmen covered by the 
settlement. Another settlement was entered on 9..9] herein after referred as 4th settlement and the time limit was 
extended upto 994 and separate panel was prepared for temporary employees, casual/daily wagers. It was agreed that 
while vacancies arising between 988 to 994 in respect of temporary employees and in respect of casual/daily 
wagers, they can be considered for the vacancies arising between 995-96 only. 


6. It is submitted that the administrative set up of the Hyderabad Local Head Office comprises of four Zonal 
Offices (Zones) at Hyderabad, Vijayawada, Visakhapatnam and Tirupathi covering all the Districts of Andhra 
Pradesh. In terms of the settlement the Management after following the procedure laid down therein prepared the 
panels of qualified candidates of temporary employees denoted as !989 panel and also panel of casual/daily wagers 
denoted as 992 panel for giving a chance for being considered for permanent absorption. These panels were 
prepared zone-wise separately for messengers and non-messengers in the descending order of temporary service put 
in by the candidates during the stipulated period i.e., |.7.975 to 3l.7.988. That the Federation approached the 
Regional Labour Commissioner(C) for implementation of bi-partite settlement in respect of absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner(C) conducted conciliation proceedings and an agreement was 
arrived between the Federation and the bank. It was agreed that it would be kept alive upto March, [997. A copy of 
the conciliation proceedings dated 9.2.995 signed by the parties is filed as material paper. A settlement was arrived 
at and an agreement was signed between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.!996 under Sec.2 (p) read 
with Sec.l8(.) of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 957, which is hereinafter called as 5 फ settlement. That on 
27.2.997 a Memorandum of understanding was also signed by the federation’s affiliate and the bank Management 
recording the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial vacancies as on 3.2.994 has since been 
completed by Central Office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were sanctioned . It was agreed that these 
vacancies may be filled from 989 panel of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non- 
messengerial staff in the usual manner and the agreement was reached accordingly. It was agreed between the 
Federation's affiliate and the Management bank that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of 
temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees would lapse on 3.3.997. That as agreed upon vacancies 
were filled from the panels. The Workman who has put in an aggregate temporary service of less than 240 days in a 
continuous block of !2 months period during .7.975 to 3.7.988 has no right to seek a direction to consider his 


9350 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


candidature for absorption in the Management bank under any rule/law except under the settlement entered into 
thereon. 


7. Respondent contended that, in fact, the case of the Workman can be considered under all the five settlements 
having got his case considered under provisions of these settlements. All the other provisions and terms of the 
settlements are also binding on him/her. The Management bank has not violated any of the provisions of the terms of 
the said settlement. That the very preparation and maintenance of panel is in compliance of the terms agreed under 
these settlements. These settlements were time bound and they ceased to exist on 3.3.[997. That the bank has never 
promised that all the candidates in the panel will be absorbed. In the advertisement itself it was made clear that 
candidates will be considered for absorption in the vacancies that may arise upto !992. Keeping alive the panels after 
3.3.997 is contrary to the settlements arrived between the State Bank of India Staff Federation and the Management 
bank. That the settlements are binding on the parties. The Workman is also bound under the terms of the said 
settlement. The settlement does not suffer from any ambiguity as their language is very clear. The right under the 
settlements is to give them a chance to be considered for future appointment in the bank's services against the 
vacancies likely to arise. The settlements were effected to balance the expectations of the temporary employees to be 
absorbed in permanent service as against the constitutional rights for all eligible persons to be considered for 
employment every time a vacancy arises. That the alleged dispute including the demand for reinstatement has to be 
decided in this context. It is submitted that the period of panel list got expired on 3!.3.97 and it is an integral term of 
the settlement and cannot be modified in any proceedings under the law. These temporary employees who 
unfortunately could not be accommodated for want of vacancies have no further rights to be considered for 
regularization. That the Hon'ble High Court in WP No.!2964/94, held as follows, "It is needless to state that the 
settlement arrived at between the All India State Bank of India Staff Federation which, is the majority union and the 
bank Management is binding on the Workmen also. It is not at all the case of the Workman that any of the terms of 
the settlement has been violated by the bank's Management. If the Workman had worked in the bank on part-time 
basis before 3].5.94, that itself would not vest in him a right to claim that his services should be regularized on 
permanent basis against a full time cadre post. The claim put forth by the Workman in the present petition is therefore 
misconceived and not tenable. However, it is open to the Workman to claim any right which flows from the 
settlement between the union and the bank Management. As already pointed out that it is not the grievance of the 
Workman that some right which has flown from the settlement in favour of the Workman has been denied by the bank 
Management. Therefore, I do not find any ground, let alone substantial ground, to grant the kind of relief sought for 
by the Workman. Writ Petition fails and is accordingly dismissed. No costs." 


8. Further, it is contended that if the panels were not lapsed at the end of designated period and allowed to be 
continued it would result in making the contracts of temporary employment indirectly permanent through back door 
entry, which would not only be contrary to the settlements but also to Articles l4 and 6 of Constitution of India and 
deprive the chances of original claimants who would Come through proper recruitment procedure. As their rights 
have been crystallized by operation of the settlements. Hence, there is no question of any Legitimate expectation 
being violated. 


9. Similarly placed ex-employees filed WP No.9206/995 and the batch before the Hon'ble High Court of A.P. 
and the learned Single Judge allowed the Writ Petitions. Aggrieved by the same WA No.86/98 and the batch was 
filed and the Division Bench set aside the order of the Single Judge. Thereafter the ex-temporary employees filed 
Special Leave Petition No.886-!888 of !998 before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The Hon'ble Supreme 
Court of India also dismissed the SLP. Therefore, reference to the Judgement of the Learned Single Judge in WP 
No.9206/97 is of no consequences as the same has already been set aside. The observations made in the Judgements 
cannot be relied upon for any purpose what so ever. The question of operation of Sec.25F would not come into play. 
Further the issue is covered by various Judgements of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and various Hon'ble High 
Courts. Hence, the reference may be ordered that the Workman is not entitled for any relief. 


20. In order to fortify his claim Workman has examined himself as WW and also filed documents in evidence 
which has been exhibited as Ex.WI to W4. Further, MWI has proved documents Ex.W5 to Ex.W7. Workman has 
filed photocopies of documents in support of his claim which are discussed as under:- 


Ex.WI to Ex.W3 are the service certificates. Ex.W4 is the employment notification. Ex.W5 is the letter to CGM 
(Per) dated 0.0.990. Ex.W6 is the letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary 
employees dt.l9.8.90. Ex.W7 is the letter from Government of India to Respondent dt.30..87. 


2I. On the other hand, Respondent has examined witness ५७७] Sri C.R.M. Sastry and this witness has exhibited 
one document, marked as Ex.MI i.e., the printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and 
Management for regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


22. Apart from afore mentioned documents, Learned Counsel for Workman has also filed a long list of various 
judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as Hon’ble High Court, which we will discuss at appropriate place in 
this Award. 


23. Heard the argument of Learned Counsel for Workman as well as for Respondent. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 935[ 


24. On the basis of rival pleadings of both the parties and submissions made by the Learned Counsel for both 
the parties, following points arise for determination in the industrial dispute :- 
I. Whether the I‘ settlement dated 7..987, 2"! settlement dated 6.7.988, 37 settlement dated 


27.0.988, 47 settlement dated 9..99l and 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 entered into between 
State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation and also Memorandum of 
Understanding are binding upon both the parties? 


Il. Whether the action of State Bank of India in terminating the services of Workman Sri Suragana 
Neelayya, a Messenger with effect from |.4.996 is justified? 


Ill. Whether the Workman is entitled for absorption on permanent post in the Branch of Respondent 
management as per averments made by him in the claim statement? 


IV. To what relief if any the Workman is entitled for? 
Findings:- 
25. Point _No.I:- Undisputedly settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9..99! and 30.7.996, 
minutes of conciliation proceedings and memorandum of understanding dated 27.2.997 were executed between the 


State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff Federation under section 2(p) and I8 () of I.D. Act, 947 
read with Rule 58 of Industrial Disputes (Central Rules), 957. 


Section 2(p) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as follows:- 


(p) "settlement" means a settlement arrived at in the course of conciliation proceeding and includes a written 
agreement between the employer and workmen arrived at otherwise than in the course of conciliation proceeding 
where such agreement has been signed by the parties thereto in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy thereof 
has been sent to an officer authorised in this behalf by the appropriate Government and the conciliation officer; 


Section 8() provides as follows:- 
46, Persons on whom settlements and awards are binding. 


- [[) A settlement arrived at by agreement between the employer and Workman otherwise than in the course of 
conciliation proceeding shall be binding on the parties to the agreement. 


Therefore, in view of the provision contained u/s.l8 (l) I.D. Act, 947, terms and conditions enumerated in the 
aforesaid settlements are binding on the parties to the agreement. The Learned Counsel for Workman has argued that 
the Workman after going through the selection procedure has successfully been listed in the panel for appointment on 
the permanent basis in the Respondent management and the empanelled list has to be valid till last person in the 
empanelled list is appointed on permanent basis. But the impugned order dated 25.3.97, 27.3.97 and ३].3.97, has been 
issued by Respondent management thereby the services of the Workman has been terminated and the said order is not 
in consonance of the terms of the agreement entered into between the parties. Further, Workman submits that the 
Respondent in the 57 settlement has mentioned the date i.e., 3.3.997 for lapse of empanel list which is illegal and 
that is not binding upon the Workman. The condition of lapse of empanelment list on 3!.3.97 incorporated in the 
aforesaid 5" settlement, is arbitrary and illegal. 


26. The perusal of the impugned order dated 25.3. [997 goes to reveal that the Chief/Branch Manager, SBI Zonal 
Office has issued the letter to all the branches with regard to the subject not to make any temporary appointments in 
the Branch in messengerial category from |.4.!997. The extract of the said letter is given below: - 


“We have been advised by the Deputy General Manager, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panels of 
temporary employees of 989 and daily wagers/casual labours of !992 will lapse by 3.3.]997, it has been decided 
by Central Office not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category from |.4.!997.” 


Thus, from the contents of the aforesaid letter, it manifest that Head Office of State Bank of India vide letter dated 
25.3.997 has issued direction to all its branches not to make any temporary appointments in messengerial category 
from .4.997 due to reason of lapse of both panels i.e., !989 & 992 on 3.3.997 as per terms of settlements 
entered into by both parties. Further, the contents of the subsequent letter dated 27.3.997 issued by Respondent 
Management is also direction to Branch Manager, State Bank of India not to make any temporary messengerial 
category appointment with effect from |.4.997 and it has also been communicated to all concerned that the panels 
of temporary employees and daily wagers maintained by Zonal offices stand lapsed from 3.!.997. Further, office 
order dated ३].3.997 has been issued by Respondent management that goes to reveal that the said office order has 
been issued to this effect that, “Consequent on absorption of temporary employees in permanent cadre, it has been 
decided by the competent authority that no one onwards, no_ further daily labour or temporary 
employees/appointments should be resorted to/engaged/employed.” Therefore, it reflects from the contents of the 
aforesaid orders that the temporary appointment in messengerial category and daily labour has been stopped by the 
Respondent management with effect from |.4.997 because of the lapsed of panel of temporary workers and daily 


9352 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


wagers by 3.3.997. The agreement for lapse of both the panels on 3.3.997 is contained in the 5" settlement 
which has been arrived at between the parties on dated 30.7.996 with the consensus of both the parties. Therefore, 
Workman can not challenge the terms and conditions contained in settlement dated 30.7.996 regarding lapse of 
panel on 3].3. [997 as agreed between State Bank of India and State Bank of India Staff Federation. As per provision 
contained u/s.l8(l) of LL.D. Act, 947 the said Agreement dated 30.7.996 is binding on both the parties. 


In the case of Allied Sales Corporation Secunderabad vs.The Authority Under Andhra Pradesh..... 990 II LLJ 
50 AP para 44, Hon’ble Court have held:- 


“4. There was a settlement between the Management and the workmen under Section 76(7) of the Industrial Disputes 
Act on 25th April /963 under which the age of superannuation of the workmen was fixed at 55 years. The settlement 
was to be in force upto 30th June 7966 and the next settlement, incorporating practically the same terms, was again 
entered into on 4th February 7967 under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act. There is no dispute that these 
settlements are under Section /6//). 


4, Now the Authority constituted under Section 47/(/) of the Act is an authority with very limited jurisdiction. It can 
only decide in the first appeal whether a termination by the management is valid or not and is within the parameters 
of Section 40 of the Act. The said Authority, in our view, has absolutely no jurisdiction to decide whether a settlement 
entered into under Section /6(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act between the representatives of the Workmen and of the 
Management, is vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion on the part of the Management. The 
Authority, namely, the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, was never intended by the A.P. Legislature to have 
jurisdiction to go into the question of the validity of a settlement arrived at under Section /6 of the Industrial Disputes 
Act by an Industrial Court. That Parliament has, in fact, constituted Industrial Courts under the Industrial Disputes 
Act, with extensive powers cannot be disputed. What we mean to say is that the Authority under Section 47(4) of the 
A.P. Act has no jurisdiction what-so-ever either to question or to decide about the validity of any such settlements. If 
parties to a settlement have a grievance about the validity of a settlement, it is for them to agitate the matter before 
the appropriate forum and they cannot ask an Authority constituted under Section 47(/) of the A.P. Shops and 
Establishments Act, 966 with limited jurisdiction, to go into any such question and, that too, incidentally while 
deciding whether retirement as per the contract of employment, is legal or not.” 


It is not the case of Workman that aforesaid settlements are vitiated by undue influence or misrepresentation or 
coercion on the part of the management. If the Workman feeling aggrieved by any terms of settlement/ agreement on 
the aforementioned grounds then he can challenge of settlement before a competent authority under the Act, 947. 
But here in the instant matter it is not a case of Workman that aforementioned settlement has been entered into 
between the parties on the ground of undue influence or misrepresentation or coercion. Therefore, Workman is barred 
to raise any objection in respect of fixing the date of lapse of both panels on 3!.3.997 as agreed between both the 
parties and Workman can not challenge any terms of said Agreement. 


Further in the case of Herbertsons Limited Vs. Workmen of Herbertsons Limited and Ors, 977 AIR 322, 
Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


The Tribunal thought that the question of the quantum of membership of the 2nd Respondent did not call for a finding 
at all in view of Ihis Court's order. As observed above that was not a correct assumption. On the other hand, we feel 
that this view of the Tribunal has led it to approach the matter in an entirely erroneous manner. The Tribunal is, 
rightly enough, conscious that under section I8 (/) of the Industrial Disputes Act the settlement was binding on the 
company and the members of the 3rd Respondent union. Even so, the Tribunal devoted nearly half of its order in 
scanning the evidence given by the company and Respondent No. 3 to find out whether the terms of the settlement had 
been explained by the President of the union to the workmen or not and whether the workers voluntarily accepted the 
settlement knowing all the "consequences". This to our mind is again an entirely wrong approach. 


“When a recognised union negotiates with an employer the workers as individuals do not come into the picture. It is 
not necessary that each individual worker should know the implications of the settlement since a recognised union, 
which is expected to protect the legitimate interests of labour, enters into a settlement in the best interests of labour. 
This would be the normal rule. We cannot altogether rule out exceptional cases where there may be allegations of 
mala fides, fraud or even corruption or other induce- ments. Nothing of that kind has been suggested against the 
President of the 3rd Respondent in this case. That being the position, prima facie, this is a settlement in the course of 
collective bargaining and, therefore, is entitled to due weight and consideration. 


It is not possible to scan the settlement in bits and pieces and hold some parts good and acceptable and others bad. 
Unless it can be demonstrated that the objectionable portion is such that it completely outweighs all the other 
advantages gained the Court will be slow to hold a settle- ment as unfair and unjust. The settlement has to be 
accepted or rejected as a whole and we are unable to reject it as a whole as unfair or unjust. Even before this Court 
the 3rd Respondent representing admittedly the large majority of the workmen has stood by this settlement and that is 
a strong factor which it is difficult to ignore. As stated elsewhere in the judgment, we cannot also be oblivious of the 
fact that all workmen of the company have accepted the settlement. Besides, the period of settlement has since expired 
and we are informed that the employer and the 3rd Respondent are negotiating another settlement with further 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9353 


improvements. These factors, apart from what has been stated above, and the need for industrial peace and harmony 
when a union backed by a large majority of workmen has accepted a settlement in the course of collective bargaining 
have impelled us not to interfere with this settlement. That being the position, we unhold the settlement as fair and just 
and order that the award of the Tribunal shall be substituted by the settlement dated October 76, /9735, The said 
settlement shall be the substituted award. The appeal is disposed of accordingly. There will be no order as to costs.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, the contention of the 
Workman that the date fixed for lapse of empanelled list on 3.3.997 for appointment to the permanent post vide 5" 
Settlement dated 30.7.996 is arbitrary, illegal is not untenable. The recognized union of Workmen has negotiated 
with the Respondent Bank Management representing large number of Workmen and the Workman as individual do 
not come into picture. Workman in the instant case has work as temporary Workmen in the Respondent Branch and 
in response of Notification he had applied for inclusion of his name in the panel and he was selected for inclusion 
his name in the panel list to be utilized for absorption of such Workman to permanent post in order of their seniority 
in the list. The Settlement dated 30.7.996 between State Bank of India and All India State Bank of India Staff 
Federation under Sec.2(p) and Sec.l8() of I.D. Act, 947 has clearly provided as regard non-messengerial position 
and it is agreed that all such posts sanctioned fallen vacant upto 3.3.]997 shall be filled before empanel list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, in view of law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the instant case, Agreement dated 
30.7.996 was entered into between both the parties in respect of lapsing of the both the panels on 3].3.[997 and 
absorption of the Workmen from panel list was subject to availability of vacancy of post likely to arise upto 
3.3.997, have a binding force on Workman as well as management of State Bank of India in view of provision 
contained under section 8 (l) of I.D. Act, 947. 


Thus, Point No.I is answered against the Workman and in favour of the Respondent. 


27. Point No.II:- Firstly, it is submitted on behalf of the Workman that the Respondent has terminated his 
services by oral order on |.4.996 without issuing any notice or paying any salary or compensation in lieu thereof. 
Therefore, the termination order of the Workman from service is in violation of provision contained Under Section 25 
F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the order is liable to be set aside. 


28. On the other hand, Respondent counsel contended that Workman has not worked for 240 days in any 
preceding calendar year. Therefore, reference of the industrial dispute is not relevant. In this context, the Workman 
has examined himself as ४४५४] who has reiterated that Workman has been terminated from service by Respondent on 
.4.996 without notice of salary or compensation in lieu thereof. Before examining the claim of the Workman on 
merit it would be apposite to reproduce the provision contained under section 25 F:- 


Section 25F provides:- 


Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No Workman employed in any industry who has been in 
continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until— 


(a) the Workman has been given one month' s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period 
of notice has expired, or the Workman has been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice: 


' 


(b) the Workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days 
average pay for every completed year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 


(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government or such authority as may be specified 
by the appropriate Government by notification in the Official Gazette]. 


Compensation to workmen in case of transfer of undertakings. 
Section 25B defines the term continuous service which provides 
Definition of continuous service.- For the purposes of this Chapter,-- 


(/) a Workman shall be said to be in continuous service for a period if he is, for that period, in uninterrupted service, 
including service which may be interrupted on account of sickness or authorized leave or an accident or a strike 
which is not illegal, or a lock- out or a cessation of work which is not due to any fault on the part of the Workman; 


(2) where a Workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause (/) for a period of one year or six 
months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous service under an employer-- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the Workman, during a period of twelve calendar months preceding the date with 
reference to which calculation is to be made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than-- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a Workman employed below ground in a mine; and 


(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


9354 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In order to prove the fact of 240 days of service within !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of 
termination, the initial burden of proof lies upon the Workman and the Workman has to prove this factum by 
adducing his oral as well as documentary evidence in support of his claim. 


Further, how to calculate 240 days of service by the Workman ina calendar year. In this context the reference of 
decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court is relevant and the same are discussed below:- 


In Rajasthan State Ganganagar S. Mills Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan and Anr. (2004) Apex Court held: 


"It was the case of the Workman that he had worked for more than 240 days in the year concerned. This claim was 
denied by the appellant. It was for the claimant to lead evidence to show that he had worked for 240 days in the year 
preceding the date of his termination. He has filed an affidavit. It is statement which is in his favor and that cannot be 
regarded as sufficient evidence for any Court or Tribunal to come to the conclusion that in fact the claimant had 
worked for 240 days in a year These aspects were highlighted in Range Forest Officer v. S.T. Hadimani (2002 (3) 
SCC 25. No proof of receipt of salary or wages for 240 days or order or record in that regard was produced. Mere 
non-production of the muster roll for a particular period was not sufficient for the Labour Court held that the 
Workman had worked for 240 days as claimed." 


In Municipal Corporation, Faridabad v. Siri Niwas (2004 (8) SCC 95), held "the burden was on the Workman to 
show that he was working for more than 240 days in the preceding one year prior to his alleged retrenchment." In 
MP. Electricity Board v. Hariram (2004 (8) SCC 246) the position was again reiterated in paragraph I] as follows: 
"The above burden having not been discharged and the Labour Court having held so, in our opinion, the Industrial 
Court and the High Court erred in basing an order of reinstatement solely on an adverse inference drawn 
erroneously ..” 


In the case of Manager, RBI, Bangalore vs. S Mani (2005) SCC Page 00, the 3 Judges Bench of the Apex 
Court held that "the initial burden of proof was on the Workman to show that he had completed 240 days of service." 


Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Mohan Lal vs Management BEL 98 SCC page 225 has laid down the 
principle that how to count 240 days of service within one year itis held: "Clause (2)(a) provides for a fiction 
to treat a Workman in continuous service for a period of one year despite the fact that he has not rendered 
uninterrupted service for a period of one year but he has rendered period of 240 days during the period of /2 
calendar service for months counting backwards and just preceding the relevant date being the date of retrenchment. 
In other words, in order to invoke the fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it is necessary to determine first the relevant 
date, ie the date of termination of service which is complained of as retrenchment. After that date is ascertained. move 
backward to a period of 2 months just preceding the date of retrenchment and then ascertain whether within the 
period of /2 months, the Workman has rendered service for a period of 240 days. If these three facts are affirmatively 
answered in favor of the Workman pursuant to the deeming fiction enacted in clause (2)(a) it will have to be assumed 
that the Workman is in continuous service for a period of one year and he will satisfy the eligibility qualification 
enacted in Section 25-F" 


“4, We have already extracted section 25B since its amendment and the change in language is the legislative 
exposition of which note must be taken. In fact, we need not further dilate upon this aspect because in Surendra 
Kumar Verma_and Ors. vy. Central Government Industrial-cum-Labour Court, New Delhi and Anr., Chinnappa 
Reddy. J., after noticing the amendment and referring to the decision in Sur_Enamel_and_ Stamping Works (P) 
Ltd case, held as under: 


"These changes brought about by Act 36 of /964 appear to be clearly designed to provide that a Workman who has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than 240 days during a period of twelve months shall be deemed to 
have been in continuous service for a period of one year whether or not he has in fact been in such continuous service 
for a period of one year. It is enough that he has worked for 240 days in a period of 2 months, it is not necessary that 
he should have been in the service of the employer for one whole year." 


In a concurring judgment Pathak J. agreed with this interpretation of section 25B(2). Therefore, both on principle 
and on precedent it must be held that section 25B(2) comprehends a situation where a Workman is not in employment 
for a period of 72 calendar months, but has rendered service for a period of 240 days within the period of /2 
calendar months commencing and counting backwards from the relevant date, i.e. the date of retrenchment. If he has, 
he would be deemed to be in continuous service for a period of one year for the purpose of section 25B and 
Chapter VA.” 


Thus, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above the initial burden of proof lies 
upon the Workman to show that he has completed 240 days of the service with the Respondent just preceding from 
the date of his termination. Further, in respect of the employment of calculating the 240 days service provision 
contained under Section 25-F read with Section 25-B of the I.D. Act, 947. 


29. Now, in view of the provision contained under Section 25 F and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, 
we have to examine whether the Workman has discharged his initial burden of proof in respect of his claim of 240 
days continuous service in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., !.4.996. The 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9355 


witness ४४५७॥| in chief examination has stated that he had worked for 254 days in the Respondent organization from 
985 to 996. As per provision contained u/s.25 F read with Sec.25 8 of I.D.Act, 947, the Petitioner has to 
adduce the evidence of continuous service of 240 days in a calendar year just preceding from the date of his 
termination i.e., .4.996. But as per the chief statement of witness WWI, vide Ex.W] and Ex.W2 he had worked 
continuously for 75 days in the branch during the years 985- 988. Further, vide Ex.W3 Petitioner has worked 
from 5.0.95 to 3.3.96 for I79 days. Further, Petitioner witness has not adduced any evidence that he had worked 
for 240 days continuously in a calendar year of 2 months just preceding from the date of his termination i.e., 
.4.996. However, the documents in evidence filed by the Petitioner do not corroborate the averment of the claim 
statement as these documents are not exhibited or proved by the statement of WW or any other witness’s evidence. 
Further, the perusal of the document goes to reveal that the certificate allegedly issued by Respondent which goes to 
reveal that the Petitioner had worked as a temporary messenger at the branch of the Respondent bank from .7.75 to 
.4.996, do not support the claim of the Petitioner that he had worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year 
just preceding from the date of his termination ie., |.4.!996. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been 
terminated in contravention of provision contained under section 25 F of the Act is not corroborated by his oral or 
documentary evidence. Thus, it is clear from the testimony of WWI that the Workman had not worked for 240 days 
continuously in any !2 months of a calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination in the Respondent 
bank. Therefore, Workman failed to establish his plea by his oral and documentary evidence that he had worked for 
240 days continuously in calendar year just preceding from the date of his termination ie., .4.!996. Thus, the claim 
of the Workman that he has been terminated by oral order without issuing notice or payment in lieu after termination, 
in contravention of Section 25 F of Industrial Disputes Act, [947 is not tenable. However the documents filed by the 
Workman in support of his claim, number of days worked with the Respondent goes to reveal that the Workman 
had worked intermittently as daily wager depending upon availability of work in branch. Workman did not file any 
document of appointment letter or salary slips in support of his claim for appointment as a non-messenger in the 
Respondent branch on temporary basis. 


30. Per contra, the Learned Counsel for Respondent has submitted the allegation of Workman that he was 
terminated from services is not correct. As the vacancies were filled up on regular basis in order of their respective 
seniority the non-engagement of the Workman does not amount to termination. Further, Respondent contended that 
no law provide that even though there is no work temporary employee should be continued in the bank work as the 
very engagement of Workman was subject to availability of work. Therefore, the allegation that the bank has 
indulged in unfair labour practice is incorrect. 


3. Thus, in view of the fore gone discussion and contentions made by the Respondent, I find the force in the 
argument advanced by the Respondent that in the instant matter, Workman was not terminated from service by order 
dated .4.996 rather he was disengaged in view of the non-availability of the work in the branch. Further, there 
was direction issued by the Head Office of the Respondent authority not to engage any daily wager Workman/ 
temporary Worker w.e.f. |.4.997. Thus, such disengagement of Workman does not amount to termination. 
Moreover, the Workman failed to prove his claim that he was terminated in contravention of provision of Sec.25F of 
the I.D. Act, !947 as he failed to establish his plea by any oral or documentary evidence that he had worked for 240 
days continuously in a twelve months of calendar year just preceding from date of termination i.e., .4.996. 


32. Further, perusal of the order dated 25.3.]997 goes to reveal that the Chief Branch Manager, State Bank of 
India has issued the letter to Zonal Office with direction to all its branches to this effect that they have been advised 
by the DGM, Zonal Office, Hyderabad that as both the panel of temporary employees of 989 and daily 
wagers/casual labour of 992 will lapse on 3.3.997 it has been decided by central office not to make any temporary 
appointments in messengerial cadre from |.4.997, therefore it was directed to issue suitable instructions not to make 
temporary appointments from |.4.997. There is no mention in this order that the Workman herein has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


33. Further, the circular dated 27.3.997 was issued by DGM, SBI to all branches in commercial network in 
respect of the non-appointment of temporary employees in subordinate cadre and it has directed not to make any 
temporary employment in the subordinate cadre with effect from .4.97 and further, it has directed to ensure that no 
temporary/casual/daily basis appointment of the petty cash. Further, it is directed to all Branch Managers that any 
deviation in this regard will be viewed seriously. Thus, these circulars do not reflect that the Workman has been 
terminated from service by this order. 


34. Similarly, office order dated 3].3.]997 is simply a direction to all branches of the Respondent bank by 
DGM that no further daily labour should be engaged or employed. Therefore, the plea of the Workman that he has 
been terminated by the aforesaid order dated 25.3.997, 27.3.997 and 3.3.997 from the service by the Respondent 
is not acceptable. The evidence adduced by the Workman clearly goes to reveal that he had worked as a daily wager 
for which he has been paid wages according to number of working days. As there was an order for prohibition for 
engaging temporary workmen, in the bank, therefore, Workman could not be engaged by the Respondent for work 
from |.4.997 and there after. It is settled law that the daily wagers are engaged by the employer depending upon 
the availability of work and as the work was not available the Workman was not engaged further by the Respondent 


9356 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


management. Therefore, the Workman on the ground of number of days he had worked in the Respondent bank 
cannot claim any right to reinstate him into the employment. As the Workman failed to prove the mandatory 
condition of 240 days of continuous service as required under Sec.25F of I.D. Act, 947. Therefore, the 
disengagement of Workman from work can not be termed in contravention of provision contained under Sec.25F and 
25 B of the LD. Act, 947. 


Thus, this point is answered against the Workman and in favour of Respondent. 


35. Point No.III:- In this context, the Workman has contended that the management failed to implement the 
selected panels during its valid tenure. The management adopted the back door methods contrary to the settlements 
and filled up the vacancies. The same is evident from the proceedings dated 8..!993 a copy of the same is filed in 
the material papers and the same may be read as part of the claim statement. Further, it is submitted that management 
has to adhere the procedure issued by the Central Government, the instructions dated !6.8.990 in the year 995, but 
same was not followed in the year 997 despite there being vacancies. The management has followed the procedure 
of calling candidates through employment exchange instead of giving chance to the empanelled candidates like the 
Workman herein. The management sent call letters to the similarly situated candidates like the Workman in the month 
of June 4997 subsequent to issuance of impugned termination orders. After knowing the fact that they are litigating 
the issue by way of dispute, the management has refused to engage those candidates, the copies of call letters issued 
are filed herein along with claim petition. The Workman herein reiterates that the panels are meant for absorption but 
not for termination. In view of the same a duty is cast upon the Respondent management to engage the empanelled 
candidates like the Workman herein even in temporary vacancies till they are absorbed permanently in regular 
vacancies. 


36. On the other hand, Respondent has contended that the Federation approached Regional Labour 
Commissioner (Central) for implementation of bipartite settlement in respect of the absorption of temporary 
employees. The Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) conducted conciliation proceedings and agreement was 
arrived at between the Federation and the Management bank. It is submitted that it was agreed between the 
Federation and the Management that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual labour would 
be kept alive upto March, 997 and the vacancies as agreed to under the afore set out settlements will be filled from 
both the lists concurrently. A copy of the conciliation proceedings dated 9.6.995 signed by the parties to the dispute 
is filed as a material paper. Further, it is submitted that the settlement was arrived at and an agreement was signed 
between the Federation and the Management bank on 30.7.996 under Section 2(p) read with Section 8(.) of the 
Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules 957 which is binding on the parties. A copy of this agreement which hereinafter 
may be referred to as 57 settlement for brevity, is also filed as a material paper. The 57 settlement dated 30.7.996 
whereunder the earlier four settlements dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9..99] were also referred, it 
was agreed to, by the Federation and the Management bank that both the panels of temporary employees and daily 
wagers/casual employees will be kept alive upto March, 997 for filling the vacancies existing/arrived at as on 
3.2.994 as per the norms agreed to between the bank and Federation and that thereafter the said panels would 
lapse. It was also agreed that within the framework of the above settlements the modalities about drawing names 
from either the panel of temporary employees or the panel of daily wagers and casual labour would be decided 
administratively on circle to circle basis depending upon the local requirements in consultation with the Federation’s 
affiliate by the Circle management. It was further agreed that all messenger real vacancies/positions in the subordinate 
cadre including part-time attendants specifically provided as leave reserve will be filled by the end of 3.3.997. 
Further, Respondent contended that on 27.2.997 a memorandum of understanding was also signed between the 
Federation’s affiliate and the bank management regarding the fact that the exercise of identifying the messengerial 
vacancies as on 3!.2.994 has since been completed by central office and thereby 403 messengerial vacancies were 
sanctioned to the circle of the Management bank and it was agreed that these vacancies may be filled from 989 panel 
of temporary employees after effecting conversion from full time non-messengerial staff in the usual manner and the 
agreement was reached upon. Further, it was agreed between the Federations affiliate and the management bank 
that in terms of the settlement dated 30.7.996 both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers /casual 
employees would lapse on 3.3.997. 


37. The Workman has contended that the empanelled list prepared by the Respondent management for 
appointment of temporary and daily wage Workers to the permanent post cannot lapse unless until it is exhausted by 
appointing all the empanelled persons and it should continue even after 3!.3.997, i.e., the date fixed for the lapse of 
panel. It is undisputed that the date of lapse of empanelled list of Workmen has been fixed to 3!.3.997 as 
mentioned in the settlement dated 30.7.996, and agreed between the parties. It is settled law that and once the life 
of panel list lapses on the date as agreed between the parties it cannot be extended beyond that date. In the instant 
case the panel list of the workmen was valid upto 3.3.997 in view of the terms and conditions enumerated in the 5" 
Settlement entered into between the parties. As the lapse of panel i.e., 3.3.!997 has been agreed by State Bank of 
India and State Bank of India Staff Federation through 5" Settlement, the Workman is not competent to challenge the 
same. 


In this context I would like to take reference of the decision of the apex court in the case of Syndicate Bank and Ors 
vs. Shankar Paul and Ors , AIR 997 SC 309], therein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held:- 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9357 


“Till 7962, the branches of the appellant Bank in Calcutta region were recruiting persons locally to work as 
temporary attenders in leave vacancies. In view of the revised procedure prescribed by the Government of India in 
respect of such temporary appointments, the Calcutta regional office of the appellant Bank issued a circular to all of 
its branches on 74.6. /9862, instructing all the branches under it to discontinue the old practice from 7.6./962 and 
appoint only empanelled candidates. The regional office was to prepare a panel of eligible candidates, after calling 
names from the local/district employment exchange, and split it up branch-wise. Following that new procedure yearly 
panels were prepared thereafter. Names of the Respondents were for the first time included in the panel prepared for 
the period 7.2. /967 to 6.2./966, By its letter dated 7.2./98/7 the Bank had informed the Respondents that the panel 
was valid for one year only and that inclusion of their names in the panel was not to confer on them any right to seek 
permanent appointment in the service of the bank. Considering the object with which the panel was prepared and the 
fact that it was an yearly panel expiring on 6.2./9866, we are of the opinion that the Respondents did not get any right, 
because of inclusion of their names in the said panel, for permanent absorption in the service of the Bank. Whatever 
conditional right they had came to an end with the expiry of the panel. The claim of the Respondents, as contained in 
the writ petition was thus misconceived and therefore the learned single Judge and the Division Bench, when it first 
decided the appeal, were right in dismissing the writ petition and the appeal respectively.” 


Thus, in view of the above law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court and in view of the terms and conditions of the 
5" Settlement the contention of the Workman that empanelled list should continue even after 3.3.997 till the last 
Workman in the panel is absorbed is not tenable. The contention of the Workman is baseless in view of recital in the 
settlement. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Point No. I regarding binding nature 
of Settlements and terms and conditions enumerated therein, in view of the provision contained wu/s.l8(.) of the I.D. 
Act, 947, I am of the considered view that life of panels lapsed on 3!.3.997 in view of terms of settlement dated 
30.7.996 and plea of Workman that the panel shall continue even after 3!.3.997 till last man absorbed has no 
legal force and same is untenable. 


38. Undisputedly, settlement agreement dated 30.7.!996 was executed between the State Bank of India and 
State Bank of India Staff Federation and in that settlement it was agreed that both the panels of temporary employees 
and daily wagers/ casual employees will be used for filling vacancies existing as on 3!.2.!994 as per the norms 
agreed between the bank and the Federation. These empanelled workmen were to be given a chance for permanent 
appointment in the bank against vacancies arising up to December 994 whereas the daily wagers/ casual employees 
were to be considered against the vacancies arise from January 4995 to December 996, whereby the said panel 
would lapse. It was agreed that the vacancies falls upto 3.3.997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is 
allowed to lapse. Thus, the claim of the Workman to the post of permanent non-messenger in the Respondent 
management was subject to the availability of the sanctioned post and vacancies arising upto 3.3.997. The 
workmen given chance to the permanent post were seniors in number of working days in panel list and Workman 
herein was junior to those workmen. Therefore, Workman could not be given absorption to permanent post being 
junior to other workmen in the panel list. 


39. Moreover, the Respondent management witness ॥५४] in chief statement has given the evidence that, “ He 
did not complete 240 days of service in any year. In pursuance of settlements between the union and the bank, even 
though who have not completed 240 days of service in a year, were also empanelled for being considered for 
appointment in future vacancies.” Although this witness was cross examined by the Petitioner but the above 
statement of the management witness in chief remained uncontroverted, as the witness MWI was not cross examined 
by Petitioner on this point. Therefore, the claim of the Petitioner that he has been removed from service by the 
management illegally is untenable. Further, witness MWI in his chief statement has stated that, the workman was 
engaged in leave vacancies in the bank on Temporary basis. This witness has categorically stated that, “Some of the 
empanelled candidates were appointed on seniority basis and number of days.” This statement of witness ७] 
remained uncontroverted as the Petitioner did not cross examine the witness MWI on this point. Therefore, the 
Petitioner Workman as per number of working days, failed to fulfil eligibility criteria of working days as required 
for regularisation. Therefore, he was not given regularisation in the employment of the Respondent. Moreover, the 
Workman witness १४५७] in his cross examination has admitted the fact that “ It is true that no juniors to me were 
given employment by the bank on regular basis.” Therefore, in view of the statement of १४५७] in cross examination, 
the claim of the Petitioner that he was refused regularization by the Respondent management illegally, is untenable. 
Thus, from the above statement of the Workman witness WW it is clear that the panel was prepared in terms of 
various settlements entered into between Staff Federation of State Bank of India and State Bank of India and it was 
prepared on the basis of number of days of work put in by the temporary employees. Further, the Workman himself 
admitted that some of the temporary employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular 
appointment in the bank in order of their seniority in the panel and he is not having any document to show that any 
person who worked for less number of days than the Workman was given appointment in the bank. Therefore, the 
allegation of the Workman that the regular appointment has been made by the bank from the panel list in breach of 
the terms of the settlement and violation of seniority of panel list is not proved by this evidence of WWI. Thus, 
there is no evidence on record that bank has given the appointment to the temporary employees as well as daily 
wagers from the panel list 989 and 992 in breach of seniority of the temporary employees in the list. There is no 
evidence of jumbling in the panel list to make appointment of any permanent Workman in breach of the seniority. 


9358 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Therefore, I am constrained to hold that the Respondent Management has appointed the workmen from panel list in 
order of seniority and there is no jumbling of workmen in the panel list before it got lapsed on 3].3.[997. 


40. However, Workman has taken the plea that the panels of Workmen for absorption in the employment of the 
Respondent banks (panels of temporary employees and daily wagers) has been lapsed on 3.3.997 in contravention 
of terms of settlement as the object of preparing the entire empanelment of temporary and daily wagers was to 
provide them permanent employment and till both the panel lists exhausted the panel list cannot be lapsed on 
3.3.997 and the date of lapsing of the panel on 3.3.[997 has been fixed by the Respondent arbitrarily without any 
authority. 


4l. In this context, the perusal of Settlement dated 30.7.996 reveals that the 5" Settlement dated 30.7.996 
was entered under Section 2(p) and I8(.) of I.D. Act, 947 read with Rule 58 of Industrial Dispute (Central) Rules 
957. This settlement has been entered into by the competent parties and in this settlement parties thereto agreed 
that both the panels of temporary employees and daily wagers/casual employees will lapse on 3!.3.997. Thus the 
date of lapse of panel was fixed by both the parties with consensus under the settlement dated 30.7.996 and same is 
binding upon the Workman under the provision of Section 8() of I.D. Act, !947. Moreover, this issue of binding 
force of the settlement dated 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988 and 9.!.99! has already been discussed, decided at 
finding in Point No.I of this award. However, the legality and validity of the aforementioned settlement has not been 
challenged by the Workman before any competent forum. Thus, claim of Workman that the date of lapse of panel 
i.e., 3.3.997 has been fixed arbitrarily by the Respondent bank is untenable. As regard the claim of Workman for 
his absorption to the permanent post it is settled law that the Workman can not claim his regularization to permanent 
post merely on the basis of number of working days. 


42. In this context the reference of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Oil and Natural Gas 
Corporation vs Krishan Gopal 2020(3) SCALE 272, date of decision 7.2.2020 is relevant therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have has laid down principle regarding regularization of the Workman on permanent posts. Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have laid down the prepositions of regularization of the workmen to permanent post is as under:- 


“(i) Wide as they are, the powers of the Labour Court and the Industrial Court cannot extend to a direction to order 
regularisation, where such a direction would in the context of public employment offend the provisions contained 
in Article /4 of the Constitution; 


(ii) The statutory power of the Labour Court or Industrial Court to grant relief to workmen including the status of 
permanency continues to exist in circumstances where the employer has indulged in an unfair labour practice by not 
filling up permanent posts even though such posts are available and by continuing to employ workmen as temporary 
or daily wage employees despite their performing the same work as regular workmen on lower wages; 


(iii) The power to create permanent or sanctioned posts lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are 
available, a direction to grant regularisation would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of 
service; 


(iv) Where an employer has regularised similarly situated workmen either in a scheme or otherwise, it would be open 
to workmen who have been deprived of the same benefit at par with the workmen who have been regularised to make 
a complaint before the Labour or Industrial Court, since the deprivation of the benefit would amount to a violation of 
Article /4, and 


(v) In order to constitute an unfair labour practice under Section 2(ra) read with Item 79 of the Vth Schedule of the 
ID Act, the employer should be engaging workmen as badlis, temporaries or casuals, and continuing them for years, 
with the object of depriving them of the benefits payable to permanent workmen. 


Thus, in view of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as discussed above, in the instant matter the 
Workman utterly failed to prove his claim by adducing any documentary or oral evidence that the employer has 
indulged in unfair labour practice by not filling the permanent posts even though such posts are available and by 
continuing to employ workmen as temporary or daily wage employees despite their performance was the same work, 
as regular workmen on lower wages. 


43. Respondent has contended that all the vacancies exist and arise upto 3!.3.997 has been filled up from the 
panel list in order of seniority and no vacancy exists or arises as on 3].3. [997 remained unfilled. Further, it is 
contended that as per terms of settlement the life of panel lists has been lapsed on 3].3.[997, hence, there is no 
occasion to extend the life of panel lists beyond 3.3.997. However, the workman failed to prove contrary by any 
evidence to the aforesaid contention of the Respondent that the vacancies were existing as on 3.3.[997 and the 
workman was not given absorption to the permanent post in order of his seniority. It is settled law that the power to 
create permanent or sanctioned post lies outside the judicial domain and where no posts are available, a direction to 
grant regularization would be impermissible merely on the basis of the number of years of service. Therefore, the 
claim of the workman on this ground also not acceptable. 


44. Further, as per the of settlement, panel was prepared for absorption of the workmen on the permanent posts 
has already been lapsed on 3.3.997 and the vacancies existing and arising upto 3.!2.994 and upto 3[.3.997 as 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9359 


settlement dated 30.7.996 has been filled up from the panel by appointing the workmen as per seniority in the panel 
list. Workman witness ४५७] in his cross examination has himself admitted this fact that, some of the temporary 
employees whose names were included in the panel were given regular appointment in the bank in order of their 
seniority in the panel. The Workman failed to show that there was any breach of terms of settlement has been 
committed by the Respondent in appointment to permanent post from aforesaid panel list. 


45. As discussed in preceding paragraph of this Award, the life of the panel has not been extended beyond 
3.3.997, by any further settlement hence, the panel list in which name of the Workman was included got expired 
on 3].3.997. It is not the case of the Workman that Respondent has regularized similarly situated workmen either in 
the scheme or otherwise and the Workman has been deprived of same benefit on par with those workmen or the 
vacancies remained unfilled on the date of lapse of panels i.e., 3!.3.!997, Industrial Tribunal has no jurisdiction to 
extend the date of lapse of panel i.e., 3!.3.997. This Tribunal can not order for regularization of workmen to the 
permanent post in contravention of the provision of Article [4 of the Constitution of India. 


In the case of Mahboob Deepak vs. Nagar Panchayat Gajraula & Anr, Civil Appeal No.5875/2007 date of 
judgement 3.2.2007, Hon’ble Supreme Court have held:- 


“8. Respondent is a Local Authority. The terms and conditions of employment of the employees are governed by a 
statute and statutory rules. No appointment can be made by a Local Authority without following the provisions of the 
recruitment rules. Any appointment made in violation of the said rules as also the constitutional scheme of equality as 
contained in Articles /4 and /6 of the Constitution of India would be a nullity. 


9. Due to some exigency of work, although recruitment on daily wages or on an ad hoc basis was permissible, but by 
reason thereof an employee cannot claim any right to be permanently absorbed in service or made permanent in 
absence of any statute or statutory rules. Merely because an employee has completed 240 days of work in a year 
preceding the date of retrenchment, the same would not mean that his services were liable to be regularized.” 


Therefore, in view of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the claim of the Workman for absorption merely 
on the basis of number of day of work in the Respondent bank Branch is not acceptable. As regard plea of the 
Workman that the Workman should have been given employment even after 3!.3.997 as temporary Workman, it is 
the discretion of Respondent to engage the Workman depending upon availability of work and this Tribunal can not 
direct the Respondent to engage the Workman in the absent of such rule/scheme. 


46. In view of principle laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed above, in the instant matter Workman 
utterly failed to establish the fact of rendering continuous service for a period of 240 days of service within a period 
of 2 calendar months commencing and coming backward from relevant date i.e., the date of retrenchment, if has he 
would be denied to be in continuous service for a period of one year. Therefore, the provision contained under 
Sec.25F of retrenchment is not applicable to Workman. 


Counsel for Workman has relied upon number of decisions of Hon’ble High Court and Hon'ble Supreme Court and 
few of them are discussed herein:- 


In the case of F.C.I., vs. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries 993 () SCC 7], therein Hon’ble Supreme Court have 
held:- 


“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 
_4 of the Constitution of which non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public law: 
A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This impose the duty to act fairly and to adopt 
a procedure which is ‘fairplay in action’. Due observance of this obligation as a part of good administration raises a 
reasonable or legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his interaction with the State and its 
instrumentalities, with this element forming a necessary component of the decision making process in all State 
actions. To satisfy this requirement of non- arbitrariness in a State action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and 
give due weight to the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely lo be affected by the decision or else 
that unfairness in the exercise of the power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from affecting the bona 
fides of the decision in a given case. The decision so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of 
arbitrariness. Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of power, as it is unrealistic, but 
providers for control of its exercise by judicial review.” 


In the case of State Bank of India, R.O., Vijayawada vs. Industrial Tribunal, Hyderabad WP ४०.।१३/व997, 
therein Hon’ble High Court have held, 


“Sri Krovvidi Narasimham, the learned counsel for the 2" respondent contends, supporting the award that it was a 
permanent vacancy and even though the 2” respondent was appointed on temporary basis, his services were not 
liable to be terminated and he was to be regularised into service on permanent basis. Shastry award warrants that no 
temporary appointment can be made to a permanent post. But the matter is now covered by two division bench 
judgements dated 26, //./9866 in W.A. ४०. 7297 of /79686 and 25.6. /987 in W.A. No.270 of 7962, The ratio decided in the 
two judgements is to the effect that there cannot be any mandate to appoint employees on permanent basis when the 
requirement was for appointment on temporary basis. But it is held in the said judgements that when a temporary 


9360 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


appointee is ousted from service and not for misconduct and, if again temporary appointment is to be made, then, the 
case of such temporary appointee who was ousted, has got to be considered in accordance with Sec. 25-H of the 
Act.” 


In the case of State of Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others. 992 (4) SCC 8, therein Hon’ble 
Supreme Court have held:- 


“49. If for any reason an adhoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must 
consider his case for regularization provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record 
is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the reservation policy of the state.” 


In the above cited judgements by the Workman the facts of the case are different hence do not apply to instant case 
of Workman. 


47. On the other hand, in support of his contention Respondent has examined witness ५७७] and ५७४] in chief 
examination states that, Settlements i.e., on 7..987, 6.7.988, 27.0.988, 9.I.99] were entered into between 
the SBI and SBI Staff Federation for filling up of the vacancies that arise up to 994 for those temporary employees 
who has worked on scale wages. Further, ७७] states that two different panels for messengers and non-messengers 
as per the eligibility criteria prescribed by the bank. There are four modules in Andhra Pradesh and they are 
Hyderabad, Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Visakhapatnam. MWI states that the temporary employees so empanelled 
were given permanent absorption depending upon the vacancies so arise strictly in terms of the settlement. MWI 
states that on 9.6.!995 conciliation proceeding was held before the RLC(C), Hyderabad and in said proceedings it 
was decided that the panels will be kept live up to 3l.3.997 and vacancies will be filled from both the lists 
concurrently. Further, MWl] = states that on 30.7.996 another settlement was entered between the SBI and All 
India SBI Staff Federation providing for filling up of the vacancies arising up to December 994 in respect of 
subordinate cadre and daily wage /casual wage employees out of panel so prepared were to be considered against 
vacancies arising from January 995 to December 996, thereafter the said panels lapse. ४४४] states that it was also 
agreed that all the non- messenger positions in subordinate cadre including part time attendants specially provided as 
leave reserve will be filled before 3!.3.!997 and as regards to non-messengerial positions it is agreed that all such 
posts sanctioned and fallen vacant up to 3].3. [997 shall be filled before the empanelled list is allowed to lapse. Thus 
in both the cases empanelled list were lapsed on .4.997. Further, witness states that on 27.2.997 a 
memorandum of understanding was reached between the SBI and SBI Staff Federation providing that both the panels 
above mentioned will lapse on 3!.3.997. Ex.MI contains, Memorandum of understanding and statements giving 
the particulars of [989 non-messenger panel, statement of !989 non- messenger panel and statement of 992 panel. 
Further, witness states that petitioner was included in the 989 panel. As the existing vacancies at that time were 
exhausted and his turn did not come he could not be given permanent employment in the bank as per the agreements. 
All the appointments were made strictly in accordance with the settlements reached from time to time between SBI 
and SBI staff federation and as per seniority, number of days of temporary service put in by them in the bank in the 
given period. Further, ४५०७४] states petitioner was not sponsored by any employment exchange he did not undergo 
the regular process of selection required for appointment as a regular non-messenger the petitioner has not worked for 
240 days in any year in his entire temporary service in the bank. The petitioner and other temporary employees were 
terminated from service by the bank. Further, ०७४] states that the vacancies were filled up on regular basis with the 
temporary employees from the panels and these panels were expired in terms of the settlements so reached and there 
were no vacancies to absorb such employees. Thus, witness १५४] has proved the documents contained in 5.0] 
printed book and also contentions made in the counter. However, ५४] was cross examined by the Petitioner 
Counsel. But nothing has been elicited in his cross examination so as to discredit the testimony of the witness 
MW/ as regards the date of lapse of both the panels on 3].3.[997 and reasons assigned for non-absorption of the 
Petitioner from the panel list to the permanent post. Moreover the witness ४४] was re-examined by the Respondent 
and the witness ४७४] states that panels were expired in terms of the settlement send absorptions to the extent of the 
available vacancies were made. There was no termination of any temporary messenger as such but their services were 
not utilized after the cut off date as the available vacancies were already filled up and most of these Petitioners were 
not in the service of the bank as on the date of the expiry date of the panels. Therefore, in view of the aforesaid 
testimony of the MW] in re-examination in the absence of cross examination remained uncontraverted, the claim of 
the Workman that he was entitled for absorption in permanent post in the branch of Respondent Management on the 
basis of panel list is found not established. 


This point is answered against the Workman. 


48. Point No.IV:- In view of the discussion and finding given at Point Nos. I, II and III, the Workman is not 
entitled for any relief and claim statement of Workman sans merit and liable to be dismissed. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion, it is held that the action of the Respondent bank in terminating the 
services of Sri Suragana Neelayya, Ex. Messenger by way of oral orders w.e.f. .4.996 is justified. Hence, the 


[भाग ]---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 936] 
Petitioner is not entitled for any relief as prayed for. The claim statement filed by Workman sans merit, hence, 
dismissed. 

Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Typed to my dictation by Smt. K. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed 
by me on this the 8 day of June, 2026. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 

Petitioner Respondent 

WWI: Sri Suragana Neelayya MWI: Sri C.R.M. Sastry 
Documents marked for the Petitioner 

Ex.W to: 

Ex.W3: Photocopies of Service certificates 


Ex.W4: Photocopy of employment notification 

Ex.WS: Photocopy of letter to CGM (Per) dated 0.0.990 

Ex.W6: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India reg. recruitment and absorption of temporary 
employees dt.9.8.90 

Ex.W7: Photocopy of the letter from Government of India to Respondent dt.30..87. 


Documents marked for the Respondent 


Ex.M]: Photocopy of printed book containing settlement between the staff federation and Management for 
regularization of services of the temporary employees and casual employees. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 759.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
आई आई टी रुड़की के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री पूरन सिंह और 45 अन्य के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-॥, नई दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 27/202, 
22/2042, 23/2042, 24/20I2, 25/202, 26/2042, 47/2042, 48/20i2, 50/202, 80/202, 8/202, 
82/202, 83/202, 84/20i2, 98/202, 99/202, 00/20i2, 0/202, 02/202, 03/202, 
04/202, 05/202, 06/202, 07/202, 20/202, 26/202, 27/202, 33/202, 39/202, 
40/202, 44/202, 45/202, 46/202, 47/202, 48/202, 49/202, 50/202, 5/202, 
52/202, 54/2042, 765/20/2, 69/202, 70/202, 77/20I2, 73/20I2, 24/20/3) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं, एल- 42025/07/2026/234-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 759.— In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 24/202, 22/202, 23/202, 24/202, 25/202, 26/202, 
47/202, 48/202, 50/202, 80/202, 8/202, 82/202, 83/202, 84/202, 98/202, 99/202, 00/20i2, 0/202, 
02/202, 03/202, 04/202, 05/202, 06/202, 07/202, 20/202, 26/202, 27/202, 33/202, 39/202, 
40/202, 44/202, 45/202, 46/202, 47/202, 48/202, 49/202, 50/202, 5/202, 52/202, 54/202, 
65/20i2, 69/20I2, 70/20I2, 7/20i2, 73/202, 2/203) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to IIT Roorkee and Sh. Pooran Singh and 45 Ors. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2026/23 l-(IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


9362 


ee 


SOP GOS FA OV a > ४४ NS, 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM — LABOUR COURT NO. II, 
NEW DELHI 


LD. No.2/202, 22/20i2, 23/20i2, 24/20i2, 25/20I2, 26/20I2, 47/20i2, 48/20i2, 50/202, 80/202, 
84/202, 82/20I2, 83/20I2, 84/20i2, 98/20i2, 99/202, 00/20I2, 0/20I2, 02/20i2, 03/202, 
04/202, 05/20i2, 06/20i2, 07/20i2, 20/20i2, 26/20i2, 27/20i2, 33/20i2, 39/202, 40/202, 
44/202, 45/20i2, 46/20i2, 47/20i2, 48/20i2, 49/20i2, 50/20i2, 5/20i2, 52/202, 54/202, 
65/202, 69/202, 70/202, 7/202, 73/202, 2/203 


Sh. Pooran Singh and 45 Ors. vs. I.I.T. Roorkee 
Pooran Singh (ID No. 2/202) 
Sherpal Singh (ID No. 22/202) 
Suresh Chand (ID No. 23/202) 
Ramesh Kumar (ID No. 24/202) 
Yogesh Kumar (ID No. 25/202) 
Munesh (ID No. 26/202) 
Pravesh Ali (ID No. 47/202) 
Rama Kant (ID No. 48/202) 
BhupenderNathPandey (ID No. 50/202) 


. Gurmel Singh (ID No. 80/202) 

. Sarita Gupta (ID No. 8/202) 

. Mustafa (ID No. 82/20I2) 

. Ram Kumar (ID No. 83/202) 

. Ajay Pratap Singh (ID No. 84/202) 

. Dharampal (ID No. 98/202) 

. SandeepGoel (ID No. 99/202) 

. Ram Avtar (ID No. 00/202) 

. Jatin Kumar (ID No. 0/202) 

. Rajpal Singh (ID No. !02/202) 

. UshaBarthwal (ID No. !03/202) 

. Ganesh Singh Negi (ID No. 04/202) 
. TassubarHussain (ID No. 05/202) 

. Dinesh Kumar (ID No. 06/202) 

. Dasi Ram (ID No. 07/202) 

. SampurnaNand (ID No. !20/202) 

. Karnpal ID No. 26/202) 

. Rameshwar Prasad (ID No. 27/202) 
. Khalil Ahmed (ID No. 33/202) 

. Mitra Pal (ID No. 39/202) 

. Shiv Raj Negi (ID No. 40/202) 

. Murtaza Ahmed (ID No. 44/202) 

. Harish Upadhyaya (ID No. !45/202) 
. Sulekh Chand (ID No. !46/202) 

. Sunil Pal (ID No. 47/202) 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


the table: 

ne Name Fost eos cael 
॥ Yogesh Kumar Sub-station Attendant (Construction) Nov 986 

2 Munesh Kumar Baildar (Construction Division) Nov 988 

3 Ramesh Kumar Unskilled Work Supervisor Mar 985 

4 Ramakant Computer Operator (CAO Unit) Jul 989 

5 Sherpal Singh Chowkidar (Security Section) Dec 989 

6 Pooran Singh Chowkidar (Students Hostel) Apr 989 

7 B.N. Pandey Work Supervisor Sep 986 


35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
4l. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 


भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 


०५०६ Ali (ID No. 48/202) 
Sushila Devi (ID No. 49/202) 
Satyapal Singh (ID No. I50/202) 
Rajender Kumar (ID No. 5/202) 
Ravindra Singh Rana (ID No. 52/202) 
Madhu Sharma (ID No. 54/202) 
Chandra (ID No. 65/202) 

Tasleem (ID No. 69/202) 

Amar Singh (ID No. 70/202) 
Arvind Kumar (ID No. 7!/202) 
Rameshwar Mishra (ID No. 73/202) 
General Secretary (ID No. 2!/20]3) 


9363 


... Applicants/Claimants 


Versus 
The Registrar, 
IIT Roorkee, 
Roorkee (Uttarakhand) 


... Management/respondent 


Counsels: 
For Applicant/ Claimant: 
Sh. Amit Sharma, Ld. AR. 


For Management/ Respondent: 


Sh. SandeepPrabhakar, Sh. Amit Kumar and Sh. Ravi Mishra, Ld. ARs. 


Award 
.06.2026 


By this composite order, I shall dispose of 46 cases filed by different workmen against the management of 
IIT Roorkee. In 20i2 and 203, 46 different references were sent to this tribunal by the appropriate authority for 
adjudication. The claimants’ name, their respective posts, years of services rendered (As of 2025), are given below in 


Years of Service (as of 
2025) 


39 years 
37 years 
Retired on 3.2.208 
Retired on 3.0.2022 
36 years 
36 years 


Retired on 3.2.202 


9364 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 


Suresh Chand 

Dasi Ram 

Smt. UshaBarthwal 
Dharam Pal 
SandeepGoyal 
Ram Avatar 

Jatin Kumar 

Raj Pal Singh 
Ganesh Singh Negi 
TassubarHussain 
Dinesh Kumar 
SampuranNand 
Pravesh Ali 

Karan Pal 
Rameshwar Prasad 
Khalil Ahmed 
Murtaza 

Harish Updhayay 
Sulekh Chand 


Sunil Pal 
Rifaqat Ali 


Sushila Devi 


Satyapal Singh 
Rajender Kumar 


Ravindra Singh 
Madhu Sharma 
Chandra 

Tasleem 

Amar Singh Rana 
Arvind Kumar 
Rameshwar Mishra 
Mittar Pal 

Shiv Raj Negi 


Gurmel Singh 


Peon (Office of DOSW) 

Mason (Construction Division) 
Telephone Operator 

Helper (Construction Division) 
Technical Assistant-B (Computer Ctr) 
Beldar (Construction Division) 
Draftsman (Civil, Construction) 

Mali (Construction Division) 

Mate (Construction Division) 

Pump Operator (Construction Division) 
Helper (Unskilled Daily Wager) 
Telephone Operator (Unskilled) 

Mate (Unskilled) 

Carpenter (Construction Division) 
Beldar (Construction Division) 

Mali (Unskilled) 

Beldar (Unskilled Daily Wager) 
Telephone Operator (Unskilled) 

Mali (Unskilled Daily Wager) 


Technical Assistant-C 
Mali/Beldar (Unskilled) 


Mali/Beldar (Unskilled) 
Mali/Beldar (Unskilled) 


Beldar (Unskilled) 


Technical Assistant-C 
Telephone Operator (Unskilled) 
Beldar (Unskilled) 

Helper (Unskilled) 

Mali/Beldar (Unskilled) 
Chowkidar (Unskilled) 
Chowkidar (Unskilled) 
Chowkidar (Unskilled) 

Peon (Unskilled) 


Helper (Unskilled) 


Aug 989 
Apr 989 
Dec 99] 
Aug 988 
Aug 993 
Jan 98] 

Nov 986 
May 99] 
Jan 988 

Sep 983 
Mar 988 
Apr l99] 
Aug 989 
Jul 984 

Jun 987 

Aug 99] 
Feb 989 
Mar 979 
Jun 989 

Dec 992 


Jun 989 


May 988 
Oct 987 


Nov 985 


Dec 992 
Feb 98] 
Jun 988 
Aug 987 
Apr 992 
Dec 990 
Jul 993 

May,89 

Jul 989 

Nov 987 


[PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


36 years 
36 years 
Retired on 3.07.2020 
37 years 
32 years 
Retired on 3.0.2023 
39 years 
Retired on 3.0.2023 
37 years 
Retired on 30.06.2023 
37 years 
34 years 
36 years 
Retired on 3.0.2023 
38 years 
34 years 
Retired on 3.2.208 
Retired on 30.09.208 
36 years 
33 years 


Passed away on 
04.09.202 


Retired on 30.06.2023 
Retired on 3.2.202 


Passed away on 
23.2.2023 


Retired on 30.04.2023 
Retired on 30.04.202] 
37 years 

38 years 

33 years 

35 years 

32 years 

Retired (3.0.2023) 
36 years 


38 years 


42 
43 
44 
45 
46 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9365 


Sarita Gupta Work Supervisor (Skilled) Aug 989 Retired on 3.2.206 
Mustafa Helper (Unskilled) May 987 38 years 

Ram Kumar Beldar (Unskilled) Oct 988 37 years 

Ajay Pratap Singh Technical Assistant-B (Contract) Jul 993 32 years 

Devender 8. Verma Lab Technician (Contract) Dec 992 33 years 

2. All 46 references contained a similar wording, where the issue for adjudication was whether the action 


of management of IIT Roorkee in not regularizing the claimants (respective posts), despite their continuous 
services for (X) years (Refer to the table above for the claimants’ post and years of services rendered), is 
justified? To what relief the workmen are entitled? 


3. Pursuant to the notice, the claimants appeared and filed their respective claim statements. They 
submitted that they were working on different posts such as Helper, Peon, Beldar, Chowkidar, Mason, 
Telephone Operator, Pump Operator, Technical Assistant etc. by the then University of Roorkee, now IIT 
Roorkee, on muster roll or daily wage basis on various dates between the years 985 to 2000. Since their 
respective dates of engagement, the claimants have been rendering services in their respective departments 
such as DOSW Office, Construction Division, Security Section, Vehicle Section, Engineering department, 
maintenance, Horticulture Division etc., regularly. 


4. The claimants, both individually and collectively, made a number of representations and personal efforts 
by appearing before the competent authorities seeking regularization of their services. However, despite 
having rendered continuousservices for more than 30 years, the claimants have never been regularized against 
permanent posts, depriving them of their rightful service benefits and opportunities for career progression. 


5. The respondent institution had proposed a plan known 38 the Y-Pool Scheme for 
regularization/absorption of the eligible workers whose names were part of the above-mentioned list. However, 
they were neither consulted nor informed about their inclusion/exclusion from the said Scheme. Consequently, 
they lost the benefit of regularization due to non-transparency and lack of opportunities, which led to monetary 
loss and career stagnation. 


6. Despite repeated inquiries and efforts by the claimants, they were from time to time verbally assured 
that the matter regarding the regularization of other Y-Pool employees was being considered by the Board of 
Governors of IIT Roorkee. Nevertheless, no concrete decision was ever taken with respect to the claimants’ 
cases, which resulted in continued uncertainty and mental harassment to the claimants who have rendered 
sincere and uninterrupted services over the years. 


sh In fact, some of the claimants were issued appreciation letters by the officers of the Institute recognizing 
their dedicated services. The divisions/departments in which the claimants have been serving are of vital 
importance to the Institute, and the duties of the claimants are essential to the normal functioning and 
maintenance of the campus infrastructure and services. 


8. The claimants came to know that a few other workers, who were in similar position or even junior to 
them and not included in the Y-Pool list, were regularized, while the claimants have been overlooked without 
any reasonable justification. Instead of amicably resolving the matter and recognizing the long-standing 
contributions of the claimants, the respondent institution advised the claimants on several occasions to raise an 
industrial dispute in their individual capacities for the redressal of their grievances. Theclaimants, having spent 
the prime years of their lives in the expectation of regularization, are now facing severe emotional and 
financial difficulties. Due to the long wait and the advancing age of many claimants, they have missed other 
employment opportunities and are now finding it difficult to sustain themselves and their dependents amidst 
rising living costs. 


9: Lastly, the claimants prayed to pass an order directing the respondent to place them on regular pay 
scales, in accordance with their respective posts, qualifications, and long-standing service, from the dates they 
became eligible. The claimants also prayed for appropriate upgradation as per the career advancement policies 
applicable to their respective posts, with effect from the dates on which they became entitled to such benefits. 


0. In response, the management filed its written statement, submitting that the current industrial disputes 
involve a total of 46 claimants who were working as daily wage employees in different capacities at the then 
University of Roorkee, now Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee (IIT Roorkee). Each of the claimants was 
put to work on various posts (indicated in the table above), and their services were hired at various points of 
time, some as far back as [98], on a purely temporary, casual, and intermittent basis. While being put to work 


9366 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


for the first time, the University of Roorkee was under the administrative control of the Government of Uttar 
Pradesh. After the establishment of the new state of Uttarakhand in 2000, the institution fell within the purview 
of the Government of Uttarakhand and later was given the status of an Indian Institute of Technology by way 
of the Institutes of Technology (Amendment) Act, 2002, which placed it within the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India. 


ll. The claimants were working on several temporary tasks being executed by the University from time to 
time ranging from maintenance and construction activities to research and consulting work, financed either by 
plan grants or external projects. Their employment was not in accordance with the formal recruitment or 
selection procedure but was made for addressing immediate operational requirements. They were classified as 
unskilled, casual workers and were being paid wages on a daily basis. Their jobs had no promise of continuity 
and was renewable solely on work necessity. In 993, some contractual and daily wage laborers, including the 
current claimants, presented demands for regularization of their services. This resulted in a long phase of 
unrest and agitation, both inside the campus and the local town area of Roorkee that accommodates defence- 
sensitive installments and army cantonment areas. In view of the worsening situation of law and order, the 
local administration stepped in and mediated talks between University officials and agitating workers. 


2. These talks finally resulted in two Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) dated 22.!.994 and 
20.02.996, signed in the presence of the civil administration. The terms of which were as under: 


e Such daily wager /contractual workers, who have been registered, would be considered for 
appointment against vacant posts according to their qualifications and on the basis of their 
seniority and on the basis of their performance/merit as per its well established recruitment 
rules, regulations and guidelines. 


e The workers would be selected on the basis of advertisements which are issued by the 
management as per the rules of the establishment. 


e Recruitment process of these categorized workers would be carried out on priority basis 
against the future vacant posts and they will not be retrenched. 


3. Accordingly, The MoUs had general understandings between the workers and the University, wherein 
all registered daily wage/contract workers would be eligible for regular appointments against future vacancies. 
These appointments would be made strictly as per the University's recruitment rules on the basis of merit, 
seniority, performance, and required qualifications. The MoUs clearly indicated that the retrenchment of such 
workers was not to take place and that they were to be accorded priority in appointments to vacancies, based 
on their eligibility and suitability. 


4. In accordance with these agreements, the University of Roorkee made a list of 36! such workers who 
were enrolled as daily wagers and placed them under what was referred to as the "Y-Pool." All the claimants 
of the present cases fell within this Y-Pool. Multiple recruitment drives were carried out through public 
advertisements dated 24.0.994, 2..994, 3.06.995, 26.07.995, 27.08.996, and 27.03.997. These 
recruitment drives were in accordance with institutional regulations and invited applications from Y-Pool 
workers, amongst others. For the regular vacancies, appointments were done through a stringent process of 
applications scrutiny, qualification assessment, and interviews carried out by properly constituted Selection 
Committees. Amongst the total 36l Y-Pool workers, 2[] were recruited successfully on regular posts, subject 
to their eligibility, merit, and performance. But the rest, including the current claimants, were not chosen since 
they either did not have the mandatory educational qualification or were considered unsuitable during the 
selection. 


5. The management further submits that the MoUs were not binding settlements in the sense of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, !947, but mere informal understandings aimed at peaceful resolution of the agitation. 
Thus, there was no legal or automatic right of regularization to any Y-Pool worker just on the basis of the 
MoUs. It is also important to observe that the basic academic qualification for Group D entry-level posts in the 
then University of Roorkee was 8th pass in the case of Peons and Laboratory Attendants and experience with 
literacy for Mali and Sweeper posts. After its reorganization into IIT Roorkee, the minimum qualifications 
were updated and for all Group D posts, l0th standard pass with one year of technical training became a 
requirement. For Group C vacancies like Junior Assistants or Junior Laboratory Assistants, the minimum 
qualification became Bachelor's Degree or three-year engineering diploma and computer literacy. 


6. These new eligibility criteria made all the Y-Pool employees ineligible, since most of them, including 
the claimants, lacked even the minimum educational qualifications essential for appointment in the said cadres. 
Incidentally, some of the claimants were |0th standard fail and so were even ineligible for Group D posts. In 
view of these amended rules and detailed eligibility-based selection process, the claimants were not appointed 
to any regular positions. However, the administration still kept them on daily wages and even granted welfare 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9367 


privileges like Provident Fund, Pension, Gratuity, subsidized quarters, revision in daily wages, and use of the 
Institute's Hospital, benefits not generally extended to strictly casual workers. 


पर In the meantime, the Government of Uttar Pradesh issued a blanket prohibition on all non-teaching 
appointments in government institutions vide orders dated 03.].]997 and 09.2.997. The Roorkee 
University, although eager to make necessary appointments, had to take special permission for any such 
appointment, and only those considered essential were appointed temporarily. The claimants were, 
nonetheless, at liberty to apply to these vacancies subject to qualifications. With the creation of the State of 
Uttarakhand and subsequently the change in the University to IIT Roorkee, these restrictions were continued 
and tightened under Government of India policy. 


8. The Ministry of HRD, Government of India, laid down a policy guideline on all IITs following 
recommendations of the Expenditure Reforms Commission (ERC), which observed an unsustainable staff ratio 
of non-faculty to faculty staff in IITs. A decision was made to bring the ratio initially to :.5 and subsequently 
to I:.l. Consequently, all IITs, including IIT Roorkee, were not allowed to appoint non-teaching personnel at 
will unless the faculty-to-non-faculty ratio was brought first within the allowable range. This policy imposed a 
serious constraint on any normal recruitment of Group C or Group D staff. As a cost-saving measure, IITs 
were encouraged to reduce their non-teaching staff strength through special voluntary retirement schemes 
(SVRS), which IIT Roorkee also considered. 


9. In spite of these general limitations, IIT Roorkee was sincere in making efforts to take into account 
absorption of the last batch of Y-Pool employees. In 2004, an agenda item to that purpose was put before the 
Board of Governors (BOG) and the Finance Committee. The proposal was, however, rejected by both statutory 
bodies on grounds of policy limitations and reiterated the central government's guidance on sticking to the 
fixed faculty-staff ratio. The claimants' continued to work on a contractual, casual, and need-based basis. 


20. The management argued that in light of established judicial precedents established by the Hon'ble 
Supreme Court, specifically in Secretary, State of Karnataka and Others vs. Umadevi and Others 
Citation: (2006) 4 SCC I; AIR 2006 SC 806,Official Liquidator vs. Dayanand and Others Citation: (2008) 
0 SCC I, Union of India and Others vs. Vartak Labour Union Citation: (20ll) 4 SCC 200; AIR 20] 
SCW 786 , and other binding precedents, there is no legal entitlement to regularization or absorption in 
government service except when the engagement has been made through an appropriate legal recruitment 
process. These decisions categorically held that neither long service as a daily wager nor contractual 
engagement entitles any one to permanent appointment legally. The courts highlighted that recruitment in 
public institutions had to comply with Articles l4 and l6 of the Constitution, and absorption without due 
process would constitute illegal backdoor entry and breach of the constitutional obligation. 


OATS The management raised objections to the maintainability of the current petitions. It submitted that the 
reference had been made mechanically, without any application of mind, and that the espousal of the dispute 
by the purported IIT Roorkee Karamchari Union is faulty. There is no proof that the aforesaid union is 
registered or that it represents a large number of employees of IIT Roorkee. Also, there is nothing to prove that 
the claimants are even members of the aforesaid union. 


22. On the merits of the case, the management simply reiterates that the claimants were given various 
opportunities to seek regular appointments through public notices made prior and subsequent to the MoUs. 
Some of the claimants even took their interviews, but were not shortlisted on merit. Some others never stood 
eligible at all for want of qualifications. The filling of all jobs has been strictly done in terms of sanctioned 
rules, regulations, and procedures. The claimants were never on the rolls as regular employees and never gone 
through any formal selection process. 


23. In spite of the non-permanent character of their work, the administration has proceeded in good faith 
by providing statutory and welfare concessions. These actions, however, do not grant them any legal right to 
absorption. The claimants’ continued service is a mere consequence of necessities and does not present any 
compulsory duty on the institution to regularize their services. 


In view of the above averments, the management prayed for dismissal of the claimants’ request for 
regularization. 


24. No issue other than the terms of reference was framed in the present cases. However, in certain cases, 
an additional issue was framed, which reads as under: 


Whether the dispute has not acquired status of industrial dispute for want of espousal by the union 
or considerable number of workmen in the establishment of the management? 


This additional issue was framed in the following cases: 


9368 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 
I.D. No. Title 
2/20i2 Sh. Pooran Singh vs. LIT. Roorkee 
22/20i2 Sh. Sherpal Singh vs. L.I.T. Roorkee 
23/20i2 Sh. Suresh Chand vs. LI.T. Roorkee 
24/20i2 Sh. Ramesh Kumar vs. I.I.T. Roorkee 
25/20i2 Sh. Yogesh Kumar vs. L.I.T. Roorkee 
26/20i2 Sh. Munesh vs. I.I-T. Roorkee 
48/202 Sh. Rama Kant vs. I.I.T. Roorkee 


20/202 Sh. SampurnaNand vs. I.L.T. Roorkee 
26/202 Sh. Karnpal vs. L.I.T. Roorkee 

27/202 Sh. Rameshwar Prasad vs. I.I.T. Roorkee 
33/202 Sh. Khalil Ahmed vs. I.I.T. Roorkee 
44/202 Sh. Murtaza Ahmed vs. I.I.T. Roorkee 
45/202 Sh. Harish Upadhyaya vs. L.I.T. Roorkee 
52/202 Sh. Ravindra Singh Rana vs. L.I.T. Roorkee 


25 At the outset, this Tribunal considers it appropriate to deal with theissue raised by the Management 
regarding absence of proper espousal of these cases. The objection of the management is found to be devoid 
of merit. It is an admitted position that the references in the present matters have been made by the 
Appropriate Government in exercise of its powers under Section 0(.) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, 
upon forming an opinion as to the existence of an industrial dispute between the parties. The scope of 
interference with such a reference is limited, and this Court cannot sit in appeal over the satisfaction of the 
Appropriate Government unless the reference is ex facie without jurisdiction. In these cases, the disputes 
have been raised individually by 46 workmen, all of whom are similarly situated and directly affected by the 
action of the Management. The dispute has been pursued through authorized representatives, and therefore, 
the requirement of espousal stands duly satisfied. The contention of the management the dispute ought to 
have been properly espoused is legally untenable, as espousal by a substantial body of affected workmen 
themselves is sufficient in law. Accordingly, the objection regarding espousal is rejected. 


26. The claimants examined themselves as WWs and tendered their respective affidavits in evidence. 
The affidavits filed by all the claimants are mostly identical materially, other than the changes in names and 
particular. Through their affidavits, the claimants deposed that they were initially engaged by the erstwhile 
University of Roorkee, now IIT Roorkee, on their respective posts on muster roll basis and had continued to 
discharge duties for the management for several years. They stated that they had been performing their duties 
continuously and to the satisfaction of their superiors and the work performed by them was of a perennial 
and continuous nature. 


27. The claimants further deposed that UT Roorkee had formulated a _ scheme for 
absorption/regularization of Y-Pool workers but they were not extended the benefit of the scheme. 
According to them, despite rendering long years of service, their services had not been regularized and they 
had been deprived of the benefits available to regular employees. They also asserted that certain similarly 
situated workers had been regularized whereas their cases were not considered. 


28. The claimants further deposed that they were entitled to regularization on their respective posts, 
grant of regular pay scales and all consequential service benefits, including arrears and other benefits 
admissible to regular employees. In support of their case, they relied upon documents exhibited as Ex. WW- 
/l(employment certificate duly signed by Chief warden, RajendraBhawan, University of Roorkee) and Ex. 
WW-I/2 (demand letter). 


29. During their cross-examination, the claimants consistently stated that they had been engaged by the 
erstwhile University of Roorkee on daily wage, contractual or project basis several decades ago and had 
continued to render services to the management. Most of the claimants admitted that at the time of their 
initial engagement no public advertisement had been issued, no names had been requisitioned from the 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9369 


Employment Exchange and no regular selection process had been conducted. However, they stated that they 
had continued to discharge their services for the management without any interruption for long periods. 


30. The claimants admitted that the University of Roorkee, while under the administrative control of the 
Government of Uttar Pradesh, had engaged a large number of workmen in different departments and projects 
according to its requirements. Several claimants stated that although they were initially engaged in particular 
projects, the work given to them continued for years and they continued to work thereafter. 


35 The claimants admitted that the management had prepared a Y-Pool including 36! daily 
wage/contractual workers for consideration against available vacancies. They further admitted that 
appointments were made from among the Y-Pool workers through a selection process and that 2!] persons 
were ultimately appointed. The claimants also admitted that they too were included in the Y-Pool and had 
participated in one or more selection processes conducted by the management from time to time. 


32. Several claimants deposed that they had applied for posts such as Peon, Mali, Gardner, Lab 
Attendant, Key Punch Operator, Senior Computer Operator and other equivalent posts under the Y-Pool 
exercise. Some of them stated that they had appeared in interviews and in some cases, had even been 
considered in the selection process, though they were not appointed. 


33. The claimants further admitted that the University of Roorkee was converted into IIT Roorkee and 
was placed under the administrative control of the Government of India. Several claimants stated that they 
were not aware of the later changes in recruitment policies, staffing ratios and eligibility criteria after such 
conversion. However, some of them deposed that after the formation of IT Roorkee, many persons working 
in technical and other positions were regularized and that the management continued to carry out recruitment 
exercises for various posts. 


34. It also emerged from the testimony of the claimants that the management had taken their services 
over long periods ranging in several cases for more than three decades. The claimants deposed that they 
continued to receive wages from the management and contributions towards their EPF accounts were 
regularly deposited. Some of the claimants further admitted that they were getting certain facilities granted 
by the Institute, including medical facilities available in the Institute hospital andresidential accommodation 
within the campus. However, the claimants also stated that such facilities were not at par with the benefits 
available to permanent employees. 


35. Few claimants further deposed that they possessed educational qualifications ranging from middle 
school and matriculation to graduation, post-graduation, diploma and technical qualifications. Some of them 
stated that they had improved their educational qualifications during the course of their engagement with the 
management. One of the claimants Sh. Pooran Singh (I.D. no. 2i/202) deposed that he had passed the 
matriculation examination in the year 208. 


36. The claimants also admitted that conciliation proceedings had been initiated before the labour 
authorities at Dehradun through trade unions with regard to their grievances. However, they denied the that 
they were not entitled to regularization or their continued engagement was only on account of the absence of 
requisite qualifications. Theydeposed that despite serving the management for years, they had not been 
granted the status of regular employees by the management. 


37. The management examined Shri Bane Singh Meena, Assistant Registrar, as MW-I, who tendered 
his affidavit in evidence. Through his affidavit, ५०४-। deposed that the erstwhile University of Roorkee had 
startedmany temporary and time-bound projects, including construction, research, consultancy and plan grant 
works, and that daily wage and contractual workers were engaged from time to time to meet the 
requirements of such projects. According to him, the claimants were engaged on daily wage or contractual 
basis as per temporary requirements and their contracts were extended from time to time depending upon 
the need. 


38. MW-| further deposed that in the year 993, daily wage and contractual workers came up with a 
demand for regularization of their services. The agitation by these daily wage workers led to building up a 
volatile and surcharged atmosphere within the precincts of the University campus, as the Roorkee township 
is under army control and a part of army cantonment, any further escalation in the existing volatile situation 
could have resulted in a major law and order problem for the entire region. Therefore, discussions were held 
between the management and the workers, concluding in Memoranda of Understandings (MoU) dated 
22..994 and 6.02.996. He stated that in pursuance of the MoU, a pool of 36! daily wage and 
contractual workers, known as the ‘Y-Pool’, was prepared and these workers were permitted to participate in 
selection processes conducted against available vacancies, subject to fulfilment of the prescribed eligibility 
criteria. He further deposed that 2!] out of the 36! Y-Pool workers were eventually selected and appointed 
against regular posts through the prescribed recruitment process. 


9370 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


39. The witness further stated that the claimants were given opportunities to participate in the selection 
processes conducted by the management from time to time. Although, some of the claimants applied for 
various advertised posts, they could not be selected due to their position in the merit list, lack of required 
qualifications or experience after assessment by the Selection Committees. The witness further deposed that 
restrictions recruitment had been imposed by the Government of Uttar Pradesh in the year 997 and similar 
restrictions continued after the change of the University of Roorkee into IIT Roorkee under the control of the 
Government of India. He stated that recruitment policy of IT Roorkee went through changes after it was 
converted into an IIT, and higher educational qualifications and revised recruitment pro4dcess became 
applicable for appointment on Group 'C' and Group 'D' posts. He further deposed that the Government of 
India had adopted a policy of reducing the strength of non-teaching staffsin the ITs, and therefore, fresh 
recruitments were reduced. 


40. The witness also stated that a proposal for absorption of the remaining Y-Pool workers was placed 
before the Finance Committee and Board of Governors; however, the proposal was not approved due to 
restrictions in recruitment processes and policies of the Government of India. He further deposed that the Y- 
Pool workers were still granted various benefits, including EPF, gratuity, accommodation, revision of wages 
and medical facilities available through the Institute Hospital, and were also granted age relaxation for 
participation in future recruitment examinations. 


4l. The management relied upon the following documents: 


) Ex. MW-I/I — Copies of the correspondence related to the BhartiyaKisan Union and with the local 
civil administration. 


2) Ex. M“W-I/2 — Copy of Memoranda of Understanding dated 22..994 and 6.02.996. 


3) Ex. M“W-I/3 — Copies of the Regulations governing the Selection Process of University of Roorkee 
and copies of internal advertisements dated 24.0.994, 2..994, 3.06.995, 26.07.995, 
27.08.996 and 27.03.997 issued for recruitment in the University of Roorkee. 


4) Ex. MW-I/4 (Colly.) — Information relating to 2!l persons recruited/selected out of 36l Y-Pool 
workers. 


5) Ex. MW-I/5 — Copies of advertisements against which the individual claimant had applied for 
various posts but could not secure a place in the merit list. 


6) Ex. MW-I/6 (Colly.) — Copies of Government Orders/letters dated 03..997 and 02.2.997 
imposing a ban on recruitment of non-teaching posts in the University of Roorkee. 


7) Ex. MW-I/7 (Colly.) — Copies of letters dated 08.05.998 and 04.07.998 issued by the 
Government of Uttar Pradesh regarding relaxation of the ban on recruitment in the University of 
Roorkee. 


8) Ex. ७४-॥/8 (Colly.) — Copy of the Selection Process/Career Progression Scheme approved by the 
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India, showing the eligibility criteria for 
recruitment in ITT Roorkee and the policy relating to recruitment restrictions. 


9) Ex. MW-I/9 (Colly.) — Copy of BOG Resolution No. BG/07/2007 dated 0.03.2003 and 
notification dated 22.04.2003 containing guidelines for recruitment of Group ‘B’, ‘C’ and ‘D’ staff 
in IIT Roorkee. 


Ex. MW-I/l0 — Copy of Memorandum of Understanding dated 27.07.2003 between the Ministry of 
HRD and IIT Roorkee regarding reduction of academic and non-academic staff ratio, along with 
copies of letters dated 08.05.2008 and 20.2.200 issued by the Government of India in this regard. 


0 


ma 


ll) Ex. MW-I/I] — Copy of proposal relating to the Special Voluntary Retirement Scheme (SVRS). 


2) Ex. ॥५७४-/]2 — Copies of resolutions passed by the Board of Governors and Finance Committee 
dated 27.0.2004 and 28.0!.2004 respectively, whereby the proposal for absorption of Y and Z 
category workers against vacant entry-level Group ‘C’ and ‘D’ posts was not accepted. 


3) Ex. MW-I/l3 — Copies of letters relating to grant of age relaxation to Y-Pool workers for 
participation in recruitment processes in the erstwhile University of Roorkee and IIT Roorkee. 


4) Ex. MW-I/l4 — Copies of documents relating to grant of facilities such as EPF, gratuity, 
accommodation, revision of wages and Institute Hospital facilities to the individual claimant, 
including letter dated 6.07.202 regarding revision of wages of Y-Pool workers. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 937] 


5) Ex. MW-I/I5 (Colly.) - Documents showing the sanctioned strength of !733 posts as on June, 200] 
and documents relating to freezing of posts by the Board of Governors at the time of mapping after 
conversion of the University into IIT Roorkee. 


6) Ex. MW-I/l6 (Colly.) — Copies of documents relating to syndicate-created posts, including 
statements of posts, appointment letters of certain employees and decisions of the Board of 
Governors regarding absorption/adjustment of incumbents working against such posts. 


7) Ex. MW-I/l7 — Copy of the verification form of the individual claimant and copies of the 
complaint, reply and rejoinder filed before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Dehradun. 


42. The witness was cross-examined at length, where he admitted that: 


e He admitted that all the claimants had been working since the period when the Institute 
was known as the University of Roorkee. 


e He further admitted that pursuant to a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) executed 
between the management and the workers in the year 994-95, the services of the workmen 
did not suffer any break. 


e He also admitted that none of the claimants had been issued any appointment letter either 
by the erstwhile University of Roorkee or by IIT Roorkee. 


e According to him, the claimants were initially engaged on muster roll basis. 


e He stated that the practice of engagement on muster roll continued till the execution of the 
MOU. 


e¢ He admitted that after the execution of the MOU, the practice of maintaining the workmen 
on muster roll was discontinued and the workmen were deployed in different departments 
of the University/Institute. 


e It was admitted by him that after the formation of ITT Roorkee, the claimants continued to 
be paid from the normal grant of the Institute, though not from the salary head of the 
budget. 


e He admitted that a pool of 36l workers, known as the Y-Pool, was created by the 
management. 


e He further admitted that 2!! workers out of the said Y-Pool were subsequently absorbed 
against regular posts. 


e The witness also admitted that, apart from the MOU itself, no document had been placed 
on record to establish that the person signing the MOU on behalf of the workers was duly 
authorized to represent the present claimants. 


e He stated that he could not say, without verifying the records, whether certain contractual 
workers had been made permanent with the approval of the Board of Governors and 
whether service benefits had been given to them from the dates of their initial 
appointments. 


e He admitted that some of the workers absorbed from the Y-Pool against regular posts 
possessed educational qualifications only up to the 5th or 7th standard. 


e¢ He admitted that he was not working in the University of Roorkee at the relevant time and 
had joined IT Roorkee only on 0.0.209. 


43. I have heard the arguments advanced by the Ld. ARs for both parties and gone through records of 
these cases. From the pleadings of the parties and evidence adduced on record, it is evident that the claimants 
were engaged by the Erstwhile University of Roorkee, and were engaged as early as 979 on their respective 
posts. In the present cases, it is admitted that the claimants were engaged as daily wagers/ contractual 
workers as admitted by the claimants in its pleadings and evidence adduced on record. The claimants were 
working continuously for different periods of time, some dating back to 979-80. 
They are being paid minimum in the scale without promotion, and at rates lower than those of regular 
employees of the management for want of regularization. 


44. The claimants did not file written submissions. However, it is clear from the pleadings, the evidence 
led by them, and the judgments relied upon by them that their main contention is that they had been 
continuously working with the respondent institution on different posts since the years 980 to 2000 and 


9372 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


have rendered long and uninterrupted service in various departments of the erstwhile University of Roorkee 
and afterwards IIT Roorkee. 


45. It is further their case that some similarly situated employees and in some cases even junior to them, 
were regularized, whereas their cases were ignored. 


46. The claimants have also argued that they have spent the prime years of their lives in the service of 
the respondent institution with a legitimate expectation of regularization and that rejection of regularization 
despite their long years of service is arbitrary and unjustified. Accordingly, they seek regularization on their 
respective posts along with consequential benefits. 


47. In its written submissions, the management stated that it had engaged the claimants as casual daily 
wage/contract workers on muster roll basis to meet temporary and project-based requirements. It was 
submitted that the claimants were never appointed against sanctioned regular posts and were not recruited 
through any prescribed selection process. 


48. The management further submitted that after the agitation by daily wage and contractual workers, 
Memoranda of Understanding dated 22..994 and 6.02.996 were executed, wherea pool of 36 workers, 
known as the Y-Pool, was created. It was submitted that the said Memoranda did not planto automatically 
regularize the claimants and was only meant for consideration of eligible Y-Pool workers for appointment 
against regular vacancies in accordance with the applicable recruitment rules and selection procedures. 


49. It was further submitted that various recruitment processes were conducted by the erstwhile 
University of Roorkee and that 2!l workers from the Y-Pool were appointed against regular posts after being 
found eligible by the Selection Committees. According to the management, no scheme for regularization was 
ever framed and appointments against regular posts were made only through the prescribed recruitment 
process. 


50. The management also contended that pursuant to issuance of blanket prohibition on all non-teaching 
appointments by the Government of Uttar Pradesh and subsequently by the Government of India, fresh 
recruitments were severely restricted. - 


Sl. The management further submitted that no vacancy existed in the C-MTS category and 
appointments to the few vacancies arising in other cadres could be made only in accordance with the 
applicable recruitment rules. It was also contended that several opportunities were given to the Y-Pool 
workers to participate in recruitment processes, but the claimants were unable to secure appointment through 
the prescribed selection procedure on account of their position in the merit list, lack of required qualifications 
or experience 


52. The management lastly contended that only continuation in service for a long period does not give 
any automatic right to regularization and regularization cannot be claimed as a mode of recruitment. It was 
however submitted that the management had granted various service benefits to Y-Pool workers, including 
provident fund, gratuity, medical facilities, accommodation, annual increments, leave benefits and age 
relaxation in recruitment processes. 


53. The management has heavily placed reliance upon the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India 
dated 0.04.2006 in State of Karnataka vs. Uma Devi and Ors., Civil Appeal Nos. 3595-362 of 999, 
wherein it was held that: 


Thus, it is clear that adherence to the rule of equality in public employment is a basic 
feature of our Constitution and since the rule of law is the core of our Constitution, a 
Court would certainly be disabled from passing an order upholding a violation of Article 
44 or in ordering the overlooking of the need to comply with the requirements of Article 
4 read with Article 76 of the Constitution. Therefore, consistent with the scheme for 
public employment, this Court while laying down the law, has necessarily to hold that 
unless the appointment is in terms of the relevant rules and after a proper competition 
among qualified persons, the same would not confer any right on the appointee. If it is a 
contractual appointment, the appointment comes to an end at the end of the contract, if it 
were an engagement or appointment on daily wages or casual basis, the same would 
come to an end when it is discontinued. Similarly, a temporary employee could not claim 
to be made permanent on the expiry of his term of appointment. It has also to be clarified 
that merely because a temporary employee or a casual wage worker is continued for a 
time beyond the term of his appointment, he would not be entitled to be absorbed in 
regular service or made permanent, merely on the strength of such continuance, if the 
original appointment was not made by following a due process of selection as envisaged 
by the relevant rules. It is not open to the court to prevent regular recruitment at the 
instance of temporary employees whose period of employment has come to an end or of 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9373 


ad hoc employees who by the very nature of their appointment, do not acquire any right. 
High Courts acting under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, should not ordinarily 
issue directions for absorption, regularization, or permanent continuance unless the 
recruitment itself was made regularly and in terms of the constitutional scheme. Merely 
because, an employee had continued under cover of an order of Court, which we have 
described as ‘litigious employment’ in the earlier part of the judgment, he would not be 
entitled to any right to be absorbed or made permanent in the service. In fact, in such 
cases, the High Court may not be justified in issuing interim directions, since, after all, if 
ultimately the employee approaching it is found entitled to relief, it may be possible for it 
to mould the relief in such a manner that ultimately no prejudice will be caused to him, 
whereas an interim direction to continue his employment would hold up the regular 
procedure for selection or impose on the State the burden of paying an employee who is 
really not required. The courts must be careful in ensuring that they do not interfere 
unduly with the economic arrangement of its affairs by the State or its instrumentalities or 
lend themselves the instruments to facilitate the bypassing of the constitutional and 
statutory mandates. 


44. It is argued that in a country like India where there is so much poverty and 
unemployment and there is no equality of bargaining power, the action of the State in not 
making the employees permanent, would be violative of Article 27 of the Constitution. But 
the very argument indicates that there are so many waiting for employment and an equal 
opportunity for competing for employment and it is in that context that the Constitution as 
one of its basic features, has included Articles /4, 76 and 309 so as to ensure that public 
employment is given only in a fair and equitable manner by giving all those who are 
qualified, an opportunity to seek employment. In the guise of upholding rights under 
Article 27 of the Constitution of India, a set of persons cannot be preferred over a vast 
majority of people waiting for an opportunity to compete for State employment. The 
acceptance of the argument on behalf of the respondents would really negate the rights of 
the others conferred by Article 247 of the Constitution, assuming that we are in a position 
to hold that the right to employment is also a right coming within the purview of Article 
24 of the Constitution. The argument that Article 23 of the Constitution is breached 
because the employment on daily wages amounts to forced labour, cannot be accepted. 
After all, the employees accepted the employment at their own volition and with eyes open 
as to the nature of their employment. The Governments also revised the minimum wages 
payable from time to time in the light of all relevant circumstances. It also appears to us 
that importing of these theories to defeat the basic requirement of public employment 
would defeat the constitutional scheme and the constitutional goal of equality. 


54. The management further relied upon the judgment of Hari Nandan Prasad & Anr. Vs. Employer 
I/R to Management of Food Corporation of India &Anr. (2074) 7 SCC 790, where it was held: 


On harmonious reading of the two judgments discussed in detail above, we are of the 
opinion that when there are posts available, in the absence of any unfair labour practice the 
Labour Court would not give direction for regularization only because a worker has 
continued as daily wage worker/adhoc/temporary worker for number of years. Further, if 
there are no posts available, such a direction for regularization would be impermissible. In 
the aforesaid circumstances giving of direction to regularize such a person, only on the 
basis of number of years put in by such a worker as daily wager etc. may amount to 
backdoor entry into the service which is an anathema to 47. /4 of the Constitution. Further, 
such a direction would not be given when the concerned worker does not meet the eligibility 
requirement of the post in question as per the Recruitment Rules. However, wherever it is 
found that similarly situated workmen are regularized by the employer itself under some 
scheme or otherwise and the workmen in question who haveapproached Industrial/Labour 
Court are at par with them, direction of regularization in such cases may be legally 
justified, otherwise, non-regularization of the left over workers itself would amount to 
invidious discrimination qua them in such cases and would be violative of 47. /4 of the 
Constitution. Thus, the Industrial adjudicator would be achieving the equality by upholding 
Art. 4, rather than violating this constitutional provision. 


55. Certain guidelines have been enunciated by the Hon’ble Apex court in Jaggo vs. Union of India, 
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3826 and Sh. Vinod Kumar &Ors. Vs. Union of India (arising out of SLP (C) 
Nos.2224-42 of 206). The facts of the cases in hand squarely covers the above mentioned judgments. In 
the above said judgments, long, continuous and unblemished services of employees who were directly 
recruited by the Government, but the management adopted unfair labour practice by employing them for a 


9374 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


long period of time.In Vinod Kumar &Ors. v. Union of India, it was held that the application of judgment in 
Uma Devi does not fit squarely with the facts at hand, given the specific circumstances under which the 
appellants were employed and have continued their services. 


56. In the said judgment, the Apex court held that long, continuous, and unblemished service cannot be 
disregarded merely because employees were initially appointed on a contractual or part-time basis, especially 
where their work is perennial, integral, and indispensable to the organization. The Court rejected technical 
objections relating to qualifications or procedural lapses, and held that outsourcing of identical work further 
demonstrates its necessity. It clarified that Uma Devi was not intended to deny regularisation to long-serving 
employees performing essential functions, but to prevent illegal appointments, and cautioned against its 
misuse to defeat legitimate claims. The relevant portion in Jaggo vs. Union of India, are reproduced herein 
below:- 


ढ“77, As for the argument relating to educational qualifications, we find it 
untenable in the present context. The nature of duties the appellants performed— 
cleaning, sweeping, dusting, and gardening—does not inherently mandate formal 
educational prerequisites. It would be unjust to rely on educational criteria that 
were never central to their engagement or the performance of their duties for 
decades. Moreover, the respondents themselves have, by their conduct, shown that 
such criteria were not strictly enforced in other cases of regularization. The 
appellants’ long-standing satisfactory performance itself attests to their capability 
to discharge these functions, making rigid insistence on formal educational 
requirements an unreasonable hurdle. 


sho sie a 


49, It is evident from the foregoing that the appellants’ roles were not only 
essential but also indistinguishable from those of regular employees. Their 
sustained contributions over extended periods, coupled with absence of any 
adverse record, warrant equitable treatment and regularization of their services. 
Denial of this benefit, followed by their arbitrary termination, amounts to manifest 
injustice and must be rectified. 


20. It is well established that the decision in Uma Devi (supra) does not intend to 
penalize employees who have rendered long years of service fulfilling ongoing and 
necessary functions of the State or its instrumentalities. The said judgment sought 
to. prevent backdoor entries and illegal appointments that circumvent 
constitutional requirements. However, where appointments were not illegal but 
possibly “irregular,”’ and where employees had served continuously against the 
backdrop of sanctioned functions for a considerable period, the need for a fair and 
humane resolution becomes paramount. Prolonged, continuous, and unblemished 
service performing tasks inherently required on a regular basis can, over the time, 
transform what was initially ad-hoc or temporary into a scenario demanding fair 
regularization. In a recent judgment of this Court in Vinod Kumar v. Union of 
India®, it was held that held that procedural formalities cannot be used to deny 
regularization of service to an employee whose appointment was termed 
“temporary” but has performed the same duties as performed by the regular 
employee over a considerable period in the capacity of the regular employee. The 
relevant paras of this judgment have been reproduced below: 


“6. The application of the judgment in Uma Devi (supra) by the 
High Court does not fit squarely with the facts at hand, given the 
specific circumstances under which the appellants were employed 
and have continued their service. The reliance on procedural 
formalities at the outset cannot be used to perpetually deny 
substantive rights that have accrued over a considerable period 
through continuous service. Their promotion was based on a specific 
notification for vacancies and a subsequent circular, followed by a 
selection process involving written tests and interviews, which 
distinguishes their case from the appointments through back door 
entry as discussed in the case of Uma Devi (supra). 


7. The judgment in the case Uma Devi (supra) also distinguished 
between “irregular” and “illegal” appointments underscoring the 
importance of considering certain appointments even if were not 
made strictly in accordance with the prescribed Rules and 


[भाग AVE 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 


Procedure, cannot be said to have been made illegally if they had 
followed the procedures of regular appointments such as conduct of 
written examinations or interviews as in the present case...” 


24. The High Court placed undue emphasis on the initial label of the appellants’ 
engagements and the outsourcing decision taken after their dismissal.Courts must 


look beyond the surface labels and consider the realities of employment : 
continuous, long-term service, indispensable duties, and absence of any mala 


fide or illegalities in their appointments. In that light, refusing regularization 


simply because their original terms did not explicitly state so, or because an 
outsourcing policy was belatedly introduced, would be contrary to principles of 
fairness and equity. 


22. The pervasive misuse of temporary employment contracts, as exemplified in 
this case, reflects a broader systemic issue that adversely affects workers’ rights 
and job security. In the private sector, the rise of the gig economy has led to an 
increase in precarious employment arrangements, often characterized by lack of 
benefits, job security, and fair treatment. Such practices have been criticized for 
exploiting workers and undermining labour standards. Government institutions, 
entrusted with upholding the principles of fairness and justice, bear an even 
greater responsibility to avoid such exploitative employment practices. When 
public sector entities engage in misuse of temporary contracts, it not only mirrors 
the detrimental trends observed in the gig economy but also sets a concerning 
precedent that can erode public trust in governmental operations. 


sho so 


24. The landmark judgment of the United State in the case of Vizcaino v. Microsoft 
Corporation’ serves as a pertinent example from the private sector, illustrating the 
consequences of misclassifying employees to circumvent providing benefits. In this 
case, Microsoft classified certain workers as independent contractors, thereby 
denying them employee benefits. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit 
determined that these workers were, in fact, common-law employees and were 
entitled to the same benefits as regular employees. The Court noted that large 
Corporations have increasingly adopted the practice of hiring temporary 
employees or independent contractors as a means of avoiding payment of 
employee benefits, thereby increasing their profits. This judgment underscores the 
principle that the nature of the work performed, rather than the label assigned to 
the worker, should determine employment status and the corresponding rights and 
benefits. It highlights the judiciary's role in rectifying such misclassifications and 
ensuring that workers receive fair treatment. 


25. It is a disconcerting reality that temporary employees, particularly in 
government institutions, often face multifaceted forms of exploitation. While the 
foundational purpose of temporary contracts may have been to address short-term 
or seasonal needs, they have increasingly become a mechanism to evade long-term 
obligations owed to employees. These practices manifest in several ways: 


> Misuse of “Temporary” Labels: Employees engaged for work that is essential, 
recurring, and integral to the functioning of an institution are often labeled as 
“temporary” or “contractual,” even when their roles mirror those of regular 
employees. Such misclassification deprives workers of the dignity, security, and 
benefits that regular employees are entitled to, despite performing identical tasks. 


* Arbitrary Termination: Temporary employees are frequently dismissed without 
cause or notice, as seen in the present case. This practice undermines the 
principles of natural justice and subjects workers to a state of constant insecurity, 
regardless of the quality or duration of their service. 


*Lack of Career Progression: Temporary employees often find themselves 
excluded from opportunities for skill development, promotions, or incremental pay 
raises. They remain stagnant in their roles, creating a systemic disparity between 
them and their regular counterparts, despite their contributions being equally 
significant. 


9375 


9376 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


¢ Using Outsourcing as a Shield: Institutions increasingly resort to outsourcing 
roles performed by temporary employees, effectively replacing one set of exploited 
workers with another. This practice not only perpetuates exploitation but also 
demonstrates a deliberate effort to bypass the obligation to offer regular 
employment. 


¢ Denial of Basic Rights and Benefits: Temporary employees are often denied 
fundamental benefits such as pension, provident fund, health insurance, and paid 
leave, even when their tenure spans decades. This lack of social security subjects 
them and their families to undue hardship, especially in cases of illness, 
retirement, or unforeseen circumstances. 


26. While the judgment in Uma Devi(supra) sought to curtail the practice of 
backdoor entries and ensure appointments adhered to constitutional principles, it 
is regrettable that its principles are often misinterpreted or misapplied to deny 
legitimate claims of long-serving employees. This judgment aimed to distinguish 
between “illegal” and “irregular” appointments. It categorically held that 
employees in irregular appointments, who were engaged in duly sanctioned posts 
and had served continuously for more than ten years, should be considered for 


regularization as a one-time measure. However, the laudable _intent_of the 
judgment is being subverted when institutions rely on its dicta to indiscriminately 
reject the claims of employees, even in cases where their appointments are not 
illegal, but merely lack adherence _to procedural _formalities. Government 


departments often cite the judgment in Uma Devi (supra) to argue that no vested 


right_to regularization exists for temporary employees, overlooking the 
judgment's explicit _acknowledgment of cases where _ regularization _is 
appropriate. This selective application distorts the judgment's spirit and purpose, 
effectively weaponizing it against employees who have rendered indispensable 


services over decades. 


27. In light of these considerations, in our opinion, it is imperative for government 
departments to lead by example in providing fair and stable employment. Engaging 
workers on a temporary basis for extended periods, especially when their roles are 
integral to the organization's functioning, not only contravenes international 
labour standards but also exposes the organization to legal challenges and 
undermines employee morale. By ensuring fair employment practices, government 
institutions can reduce the burden of unnecessary litigation, promote job security, 
and uphold the principles of justice and fairness that they are meant to embody. 
This approach aligns with international standards and sets a positive precedent for 
the private sector to follow, thereby contributing to the overall betterment of 
labour practices in the country.” 


37. The supreme court reiterating the principles laid down in Jaggo (supra) again in the case of Shripal 
v. Nagar Nigam, Ghaziabad, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 22], held that that employees who have worked 
continuously and without complaint for long periods in roles that are perennial and essential cannot be 
arbitrarily terminated or denied regularisation, as such action would be unconstitutional. In such 
circumstances, the employer cannot rely on technical objections such as absence of a formal selection 
process, lack of sanctioned posts, or recruitment bans. It further clarifies that Uma Devi does not bar 
regularisation in these cases, particularly where long-standing service reflects a genuine and ongoing need 
for the work performed. The relevant portion is reproduced herein below: - 


“3, By requiring the same tasks (planting, pruning, general upkeep) from the 
Appellant Workmen as from regular Gardeners but still compensating them 
inadequately and inconsistently the Respondent Employer has effectively engaged 
in an unfair labour practice. The principle of “equal pay for equal work,” 
repeatedly emphasized by this Court, cannot be casually disregarded when 
workers have served for extended periods in roles resembling those of permanent 
employees. Long-standing assignments under the Employer's direct supervision 
belie any notion that these were mere short-term casual engagements. 


4. The Respondent Employer places reliance on Umadevi to contend that daily- 
wage or temporary employees cannot claim permanent absorption in the absence 
of statutory rules providing such absorption. However, as frequently reiterated, 
Uma Devi itself distinguishes between appointments that are “illegal” and those 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9377 


that are “irregular,” the latter being eligible for regularization if they meet certain 
conditions. More importantly, Uma Devi cannot serve as a shield to justify 
exploitative engagements persisting for years without the Employer undertaking 
legitimate recruitment. Given the record which shows no true contractor-based 
arrangement and a consistent need for permanent horticultural staff the alleged 
asserted ban on fresh recruitment, though real, cannot justify indefinite daily-wage 
status or continued unfair practices. 


I5 It is manifest that the Appellant Workmen continuously rendered their services 
over several years, sometimes spanning more than a decade. Even if certain muster 
rolls were not produced in full, the Employer's failure to furnish such records— 
despite directions to do so—allows an adverse inference under well- established 
labour jurisprudence. Indian labour law strongly disfavors perpetual daily-wage 
or contractual engagements in circumstances where the work is permanent in 
nature. Morally and legally, workers who fulfil ongoing municipal requirements 
year after year cannot be dismissed summarily as dispensable, particularly in the 
absence of a genuine contractor agreement....”’ 


58. So far so the reliance placed by the management in HariNandanParsad (Supra) is concerned, that 
stands nowhere. In the present matters, the posts on which the claimants had been working continuously for 
decades are admittedly perennial in nature. The management not only absorbed 2! out of 36l Y-pool 
workmen against regular posts at different points of time by conducting the recruitment processes,and left out 
the workmen herein for not succeeding in the recruitment test or otherwise not fulfilling the criteria, but also 
continued to avail their services, meaning thereby that the posts on which they are working are essential in 
nature. 


59. Moreover, it is admitted by the management that in 2004, an agenda item was put before the Board 
of Governors (BOG) and the Finance Committee for absorption of the last batch of “Y-pool’ employees. 
However, this proposal was rejected by both statutory bodies on grounds of policy limitations and reiterated 
the central government's guidance on sticking to the fixed faculty-staff ratio. However, the claimants’ 
association continued to be contractual, casual, and need-based basis. 


60. Therefore, in the guise of policy limitations, the workmen cannot be left in limbo because it would 
amount to discrimination qua them and would be violative of article l4 of the constitution, particularly when 
initially all 36l “Y-pool’ workmen were initially engaged directly without undergoing any recruitment process 
and most of them were subsequently absorbed by the management. 


6l. Long experience of work and long association with the department would naturally result in 
acquisition of expertise in the posts on which the workmen are working. The posts held by the claimants are 
those of Helper, Peon, Beldar, Chowkidar, Mason, Telephone Operator, Pump Operator, Technical Assistant, 
Lab. Technician etc.Their experience of working on these posts for decades itself is sufficient to meet the 
standard of the post on which the claimants are working. 


Relief 


In view of the above discussion, it is held that the action of the management in not regularizing the 
services of the claimants is unjustified. Accordingly, the claimants who continue to be in service are held 
entitled to regularization on their respective posts. Now the question arises for consideration is as to from 
which date the claimants are entitled to be given benefits of regularization. The claimants have made prayer 
in their claim statements that they be regularized from the dates of their initial appointment by the 
management on daily wage/contract basis. However, the same cannot be accepted. If their pleas are accepted, 
the management would not be in a position to engage workers on a daily-wage or contractual basis to meet 
contingency of work. At least some length of service is required to be rendered by the workmen before they 
seek regularization. 


In the claims in hand, it would be proper if the claimants are ordered to be regularized with effect 
from the date of reference made by the appropriate government, considering that they have rendered long 
years of service who spanned for decades and their continuance of service even as of today in some of the 
cases. 


In view of the above, the claimants are entitled to be regularized with effect from the date of reference 
of the dispute, along with all consequential service benefits. 


The claimants who retired during the pendency of the proceedings shall also be entitled to the 
consequential monetary and retiral benefits arising out of the regularization with effect from the date of 
reference. 


9378 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


In respect of the claimants who expired during the pendency of the proceedings, the consequential 
monetary benefits arising from this Award shall be computed with effect from the date of reference and 
released to their legal heirs in accordance with law. 


The management is directed to implement the Award within two months from the date of its 
publication.A copy of this award be sent to the appropriate government for notification under section |7 of 
the I.D Act. A copy of this award is also placed in each of the connected files. The file is consigned to record 
room. 


Dated .06.2026 ATUL KUMAR GARG , Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 760.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
नेशनल थर्मल पावर कॉर्पोरेशन; मेसर्स यूटिलिटी पावर टेक लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और एनटीपीसी ठेका 
श्रमिक संघ के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय-॥, नई 
दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 46/205) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है | 


[सं. एल- 42025/07/2026/228-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 760.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 46/205) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to National Thermal Power Corporation; M/s Utility Power Tech Ltd. and NTPC Theka 
Shramik Sangh. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2026/228-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDSUTRIAL TRIBUNAL - CUM —- LABOUR 
COURT-II, NEW DELHI 


LD. NO. 46/205 

The General Secretary 

NTPC Theka Shramik Sangh, 

Village- Salarpur Kalan, P.O- Vidyut Nagar, Dadri, 
Gautam Buddh Nagar, UP-20008. 


VERSUS 


l. The General Manager, 
National Thermal Power Corporation, 
Vidyut Nagar, Dadri, 
Gautam Buddh Nagar, UP-20008. 


2. M/s Utility Power Tech Ltd. 
National Capital Power Project Premises, 
P.O. Vidyut Nagar, District Gautam Budh Nagar, 
Dadri (U.P.)-20008. 


Also at: 
BSES Tower, 5" Floor, A2, 
Sector-24, Noida (U.P.)-2030. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9379 


AWARD 
04.06.2026 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section |0 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour and 
Employment, vide its Order No. L-4204/I3/205-IR (DU) dated 7.08.205 has been pleased to refer the 
following dispute between the employer, that is the Management of National Thermal Power Corporation and 
their workman for adjudication by this Tribunal, terms of which are as under: 


“Whether the given 9 no. of workmen hold valid grounds to be reinstated in the 
service of NTPC/M/s Utility Powertech Limited and be regularised under NTPC, 
Dadri looking into the status of the M/s Utility Powertech Limited as a contractor of 
M/s NTPC Limited? If so, what requisites should be looked into for their 
regularisation?” 


Upon receiving the reference workmen had filed their claim statement stating they are members of 
their Trade Union i.e. NTPC Theka Shramik Sangh, situated at Village & Post Office Salarpur Kalan, 
District Gautam Budh Nagar-20l008 since long. They have been working with management no. | since 
0.0.20i0 continuously without any break under its direct control and supervision. They have been working 
as electric/data entry operator/technician with the management no. | for a long period of time. Their service 
records were neat and clean and there was no complaint of any kind on the part of the claimants. The 
contractors of management no. | are appointed on the basis of license of surveyors. Management no. | is 
large entity and primarily engaged into the business of generating electricity and allied businesses i.e. 
maintaining power houses, power generating plant and factory, productions, transmission and distributions of 
electricity on PAN India basis. Management no. | has many factories, offices, godowns, power lines, boilers, 
open spaces, offices etc. It is also an industrial establishment as well as factory under the applicable 
provisions of law. However, it is not complying with mandatory pre-condition as stipulated under ID Act, 
947, CLRA Act, ESI, EPF, Payment of bonus Act, Shops and Establishment Act, Industrial Employment 
(standing order Act, 946), Factories Act etc. They had been continuously working with the management for 
several years on duties of a regular, perennial, and permanent nature. They were engaged through contractors 
who were allegedly not duly licensed and the arrangement between the management and the contractors was 
challenged as a sham and camouflage intended to deny statutory and service benefits to the claimant and 
similarly situated workers. They further submitted that at the initial stage of their employment, the 
management got some blank papers, proformas, full and final receipts and blank appointment letter signed 
from the claimant but did not provide the copies of the blank signed papers to the claimant. They also stated 
that despite performing duties similar to those performed by regular employees, they were denied equal 
service conditions, regularization, and wages equivalent to those paid to regular employees. They repeatedly 
raised grievances regarding unfair labour practices, non-regularisation, and denial of equal pay for equal 
work. However, their representations were not adequately addressed by the management. They were forced 
to work beyond 7-l8 hours in a day by the management and they were also not provided the safety 
equipment and for the said reason a lot of workman was met with an accident and lost their life in multiple 
accident. Due to those accidents, many of the workmen have died or become permanently handicapped. They 
had been demanding these legal facilities orally from the management on account of the demand, the 
management kept rancor against the claimants and wanted to terminate the service of the claimants illegally 
and unjustifiably for demanding these legal benefits. Thereafter, their services have been illegally terminated 
on 3I.2.204. Claimants had worked for more than 240 days in every calendar year with the management 
no. | without any break since beginning i.e. date of his initial appointment till the date of his termination of 
services. They had approached their trade union and submitted their demands. Thereafter, the demands were 
made to the management for redressal of long pending grievances. However, the same were not met by the 
management and deemed to have been refused. They have gone to the conciliation, but, it was resulted into 
failure. Hence, they filed their present claim with the prayer to direct the management to settle all the claims 
of the claimants; reinstate their respective services with full back wages; give the benefits of “equal work for 
equal pay”; and regularize their services with management no. | from the date of their respective initial 
appointments. 


Management no. | has filed its written statement. He had stated that there is no relationship of 
employer and employee or of any other kind between the NTPC Ltd. (Management no. |) and the claimants. 
He submitted that NTPC Ltd. is a Government of India enterprise and functioning under the administrative 
control of Ministry of Power. They have entered into an agreement with M/s Utility Powertech Ltd. i.e. 
management no. 2 and awarded contract for identified works of the various power stations, projects and 
offices for consideration. It is submitted by him that management no. 2 i.e. M/s Utility Powertech Ltd. is the 
principle employer of their contract workers. He submitted that claim of the claimants is liable to be 
dismissed. 


9380 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Management no. 2 has filed its written statement stating that answering respondent is a joint venture 
of NTPC Ltd. and Reliance Infrastructure Ltd. (erstwhile Reliance Energy Ltd.). It is company registered 
under the Companies Act, |956, and thus is a separate legal entity with its Board of Directors. They had got 
work from NTPC Ltd. vide letter dated 20.02.2009 and purchase order no. 4600002368-07-l0l. The 
duration of the service period of the said work order was from 0.!.2008 to 09.02.2009. They submitted 
that workmen were never their employees or hired directly by them to get the said work done. To get the said 
work done, services of the contractor M/s Raj Singh Rana & Co., Village Rasoolpur, Dasna, NTPC, 
Vidyut Nagar, G.B. Nagar, UP was availed of M/s Utility Powertech Ltd. (management no. 2). They 
submitted that Sh. Naresh Bhardwaj, Sh. Vijay Pal, Sh. Avnish Pratap, Sh. Jitender were employed by the 
contractor M/s Raj Singh Rana & Co. initially and Sh. Birpal and Sh. Ramesh were later hired in addition to 
the original four by the contractor to complete the said work order. All the payments as per the contract and 
statutory provisions were made to the workmen by the said contractor, the details of which were supplied to 
management no. 2 by the contractor, which bear their signature. They submitted that payments were made to 
the contractor i.e. M/s Raj Singh Rana & Co. by UPL and the said contractor used to make the payments to 
the workman engaged by it. M/s Utility Powertech Ltd. (management no. 2) has no role to play except to 
ensure that the statutory payments are made to the said workmen. Hence, he submitted that claim of the 
claimant s is liable to be dismissed on this ground. 


Rejoinder has been filed by the claimants denying the averments made in the written statements of 
the management no. | & 2 and affirmed the facts mentioned in his claim statement. 


After completion of the pleadings, vide order dated 2.0.2023, following issues have been framed 


l. Whether the workman is entitled to relief claimed as per reference? (OPW). 


2. Ifthe answer of the issue no. | is affirmative, then what relief the claimant is entitled to and from 
which date? 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. Workmen are required to file their affidavits of 
evidence, but, neither the workmen nor their AR has been appearing from several dates to substantiate their 
claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimants are not interested in pursuing their case, this tribunal has 
no other option but to dismiss the claim. Hence, their claim stands dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. 
A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required under section |7 of 
the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 04.06.2026 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 76.—aitearthrs विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
जवाहरलाल नेहरू विश्वविद्यालय; जी4एस an सॉल्यूशंस (इंडिया) प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों 
और श्री दिनेश कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम 
न्‍्यायालय-॥, नई दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 262/2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल- 42025/07/2026/229-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 76l.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 262/2022) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to Jawaharlal Nehru University; G4S Secure Solutions (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Sh. Dinesh 
Kumar. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2026/229-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 938] 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDSUTRIAL TRIBUNAL - CUM —- LABOUR COURT-II, 
NEW DELHI 


LD. NO. 262/2022 
Sh. Dinesh Kumar, S/o Sh. Meghraj Singh Dagur, 
R/o- Chinayata, Karauli, Rajasthan-322236. 


VERSUS 
l. The Vice Chancellor, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi-!0067. 


2. The Chairman/Director/A.R., 
GAS Secure Solutions (India) Pvt. Ltd., 
Reg. Office: C-6, C-Block, Community Centre, 
Janakpuri, New Delhi-0058. 


AWARD 
0.06.2026 


This is an application U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). 
Claimant had stated in his claim statement that he was employed as Guard on dated 07.08.205 by the management 
no. | through contractor i.e. management no. 2 and his last drawn salary was Rs. 4,l00/- p.m. He had been 
performing his duty with utmost care and diligence and there has never been any complaint against him. Management 
no. | released for wages to management no. 2 each and every months amount Rs. 30,000/- per month as per Central 
Government Minimum Wages Act. He has been suffering mentally, physically and economically due to the non 
complete payment of salary released by the managements. He had not been provided legal facilities i.e. earns leave, 
casual leave, attendance register, overtime, leave book, bonus etc. when he demanded the aforesaid legal facilities, 
without any rhyme and reason his services have been terminated which is a violation of section 25-F of the I.D. Act. 
He approached many times to the management’s office for his dues, but, management neither paid the payment of 
workman dues nor taken him back on duty. He had gone to the conciliation which was resulted into failure. Hence, he 


filed the claim with the prayer that he be reinstated with full back wages. 


Management no. | has filed its written statement denying the averment made in her claim statement. He 
submitted that the workman was employed by the management no. 2, who was providing the security services in 
terms of the contract entered into between the managements and hence there is no employer-employee relationship 
between the management and the workman. He had stated that claim filed by the claimant is not maintainable and is 


liable to be dismissed. 
Management no. 2 has already been proceeded ex-parte vide order dated 3.03.2023. 


Rejoinder has been filed by the claimant denying the averment made in the WS of management no. | and 


affirmed the fact mentioned in his claim statement. 
After completion of the pleadings, vide order dated 9.03.2024, following issues have been framed i.e. 
l. Whether there exists any employer or employee relationship between १॥-| and workman. 
2. Whether the service of the workman stand terminated illegally in violation of labour law. 
3. Relief, if any. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. Workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate 


his claim inspite of providing a number of opportunities. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim, it 


appears that he is not interested in pursuing his case. His claim stands dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy 


9382 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 47 of the ID act 947. 


File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 0.06.2026 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 762.— aires विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
aim पोस्ट मास्टर जनरल, दिल्ली; पोस्ट मास्टर, झिलमिल पोस्ट ऑफ़िस के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री कमल 
कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-॥, नई 
दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 207/208) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है । 


[सं, एल- 42025/07/2026/230-आईआर(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 762.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 207/208) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to The Chief Post Master General Delhi; Post Master, Jhilmil Post Office and 
Sh. Kamal Kumar. 

[No. L- 42025/07/2026/230-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDSUTRIAL TRIBUNAL — CUM —- LABOUR COURT-II, 
NEW DELHI 

LD. NO. 207/208 

Sh. Kamal Kumar, S/o Sh. Uday Singh, 

Through- Progressive National Labour Union, 

205, Pratap Khand, Vishwakarma Nagar, 

Delhi-0095. 


VERSUS 


l. The Chief Post Master General Delhi, 
Meghdoot Bhawan, New Delhi-000I. 


2. Post Master, Jhilmil Post Office, 
Jhilmil Industrial Area, Delhi-0095. 


Counsels: 
For Applicant/ Claimant: 
None 


For Management/ Respondent: 
Ms. Seema Grover, Ld. AR 


AWARD 
2.06.2026 


l. | Workman has triggered the process for filing the claim petition after obtaining the failure report as required 
under section 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). In his claim 
petition the workman has stated that he had been working with the respondent at the post of “Postman” 
w.e.f. 0.04.204 at the last drawn salary of Rs. 5,000/- per month. He did his job sincerely and honestly 
and had not given any complaint to the respondent. Respondent without any rhyme and reason has 
terminated his services on 26.04.20i8. Hence, he made prayer that he be reinstated in services with full back 
wages because he is not able to obtain the job. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9383 


2. Respondent herein has filed its written statement countering the submission of the claimant. He has stated 
that the claimant got the employment with the respondent through agency/contractor as outsourced delivery 
personnel for delivery of letters/dak. After expiry of the contract with the agency i.e. M/s G.A. Digital Web 
Word Pvt. Ltd. on 3i.2.20I6, the delivery work was managed by hiring the labour on daily basis as per 
the work load and requirement by the department till regular appointments were made and paid wages as per 
the minimum wages prescribed by Delhi Government from time to time. 


3. | Management had taken the preliminary objections stating that claim of the claimant is not maintainable as 
the very essence for registering the claim of the claimant under Industrial Dispute Act, l947 is lacking. The 
“Industrial Dispute” is defined by Section 200 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 as, any dispute or 
difference between employers and employers, or between employers and workmen, or between workman 
and workman, which is connected with the employment or non-employment or terms of employment or with 
the conditions of labour, of any person. The services of the claimant was no more required in view of the 
recruitment of about 740 regular Postman/Mail guard through open market competitive exam conducted as 
per relevant recruitment rules; claimant has not made the authorities of the said outsourced agency M/s G.A 
Digital Web World Pvt. Ltd. as party in the present claim for the proper and fair disposal of the case; 
instant claim is bad in law, without application of mind and in a stereotype manner hence liable to be 
dismissed; instant claim is not maintainable in view of the judgments passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
in the case of State of Karnataka vs. Uma Devi & Ors. [2006 (4) SCC I], as the applicant has no cause of 
action for filing the present claim. Infact, management has denied the master and servant relationship. He 
submitted that after expiry of the contract with the agencies, claimant himself offered to be engaged on daily 
wage basis as and when required. Hence, the question of his dis-engagement does not arise. On merit, he has 
denied the averments of the claimant’s claim and submitted that claim is liable to be dismissed. 


4.  Rejoinder has been filed the rejoinder denying the averments made in the written statement and affirmed the 
fact mentioned in his claim statement. 


5. After completion of the pleadings, vide order dated 26.07.209, following issues have been framed i.e.- 


(i) | Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 


(ii) Whether there exists any employer and employee relationship between management and the 
workman. 


(iii) Whether the service of the workman was illegally terminated in violation of provisions of 
Section 25-F of the ID Act. 


(iv) To what relief the workman is entitled to. 


6. In order to prove and disprove the issues, both the claimant and the management have examined one 
witness each. Claimant himself has entered into the witness box and reiterated the facts in his examination 
in chief as stated by him in his claim statement. He has relied upon three documents i.e.- 


(i) Ex. WWI/l & Ex. WWI/2: Copy of demand letter dated 23.05.208 alongwith postal receipts. 
(ii) Ex. WWI/3: Claim filed on 3.06.208 before the Labour Commissioner (Central). 


7. Workman in his cross-examination has admitted that he came to know of the vacancy from 0.0!.20l4 
through one Girish Chand Joshi. He joined the management on 0.04.20l4. He also admitted that no 
advertisement, application form, appointment letter or identity card was issued to him. He stated that no 
salary slip, PF, ESI, DA, HRA or other services benefits were ever provided to him. He submitted that he 
never appeared in any such written test. He was getting his remuneration after each I5 days through 
vouchers. He denied having any knowledge of M/s G.A. Digital Web World Pvt. Ltd. His services were 
terminated on 04.04.208. 

8. In rebuttal, management has filed the affidavit of evidence of Sh. Sajid Vishal, Assistant Superintendent 
exhibited as Ex. MWI/A. He has deposed the facts, stating that Department of Posts had issued tender for 
providing skilled, semi-skilled and un-skilled man power in PO & RMS Offices of Delhi Circle on 
different dates and was awarded the contract to M/s G.A. Digital Web Word Pvt. Ltd. He further stated 
that workman was provided by M/s G.A. Digital Web Word Pvt. Ltd. agencies/contractor as outsourced 
delivery personnel for delivery of letter at Jhilmil Head Post Office, Delhi-!l0095. On account of filling up 
of the said posts by making regular appointment, service of the workman was not required. Even after, 
expiry of the contract with the agency M/s G.A. Digital Web Word Pvt. Ltd. on 3.2.206, the delivery 
work was managed by hiring the labour on daily rate basis as per the work load and requirement by the 
department till regular appointments were made and was paid wages as per the minimum wages prescribed 
by Delhi Government time to time. He also stated that during the visit by then Postmaster, Jhilmil HO, a 


9384 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


total of 346 undelivered mail was recovered from the Jhilmil Industrial Area on 4.02.205, which shows 
extreme delinquency in duty by the claimant. He further said that there was an opportunity to the workman 
to appear in the competitive exam conducted by Delhi Postal Circle, but, said opportunity has not been 
availed by the workman. The extended terms and conditions of the tender were expired on dated 
3.2.20I6. He has relied upon two documents i.e.: 


(i) Ex. १७५७७४]/] :] लाल of authorization dated 20..2023. 


(ii) Ex. WWI/2: tender document semi skilled manpower in Delhi Postal Circle by 
M/s G.A. Digital Web Word Pvt. Ltd. (Colly.) 


9. Management’s witness in his cross-examination has admitted that workman was not given any appointment 
letter. He admitted that domestic enquiry was conducted against the claimant by the vigilance team of 
management. 


0. So far so, issues no. | & 2 are concerned. The admission of the management that even after the expiry of 
the contract, he continued take the service of the claimant itself establishes the relationship of employer- 
employee between them. Though, it is an admitted fact that initially the claimant’s services were hired 
through contractor i.e. M/s G.A Digital Web World Pvt. Ltd., but, later on after expiry of the contract, his 
services have been continuously availed by the management and the claimant was paid the minimum 
pay scale. 


ll. Moreover, the management has taken plea that enquiry was conducted by the vigilance team of the 
management, but, the management has stated that in the written statement that there exist no relationship 
of employer and employee, so, how the vigilance team has conducted the enquiry and even continued his 
service till April, 208, though, the 346 undelivered mail has been found on 4.02.20]5. 


2. In the light of aforesaid evidence and admission of the management regarding conducting of the vigilance 
inquiry, claimant has proved relationship of employer and employee between the management and the 
workman. Therefore, the objection in this regard regarding the non-existence does not stand anywhere. 
Therefore, both issues regarding the maintainability of the petition as well as the existence of employer- 
employee relationship goes against the management and in favour of the workman. 


3. Now, come to the issue no. 3 i.e. “Whether the service of the workman was illegally terminated by the 
management in violation of provision of Section 25-F of the I.D. Act”. Claimant’s claim is that his services 
have been terminated illegally on 26.04.208 after withholding the salary of month of April, 208. 


4. Before dealing with this issue, the texts of Sections 2(00), 25F, G and H of the Act are required to be 
reproduced herein: 


Section 2(00): 


“retrenchment” means the termination by the employer of the service of a 
workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by 
way of disciplinary action, but does not include- 


(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or 

(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the 
contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned 
contains a stipulation in that behalf; or 

(c) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the on-renewal of the 
contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned 
on its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that 
behalf contained therein; or] 

(d) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill- 
health; ] 


25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen: No workman employed in any 
industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer 
shall be retrenched by that employer until- 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9385 


(a) the workman has been given one month’s notice in writing indicating the reasons for 
retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has been paid in lieu 
of such notice, wages for the period of the notice; 

(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be 
equivalent to fifteen days' average pay [for every completed year of continuous service] 
or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 

(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government [or such 
authority as may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette]. 

25G. Procedure for retrenchment.—Where any workman in an industrial establishment, 
who is a citizen of India, is to be retrenched and he belongs to a particular category of 
workmen in that establishment, in the absence of any agreement between the employer 
and the workman in this behalf, the employer shall ordinarily retrench the workman who 
was the last person to be employed in that category, unless for reasons to be recorded the 
employer retrenches any other workman. 


25H. Re-employment of retrenched workmen.—Where any workmen are retrenched, 
and the employer proposes to take into his employ any persons, he shall, in such manner 
as may be prescribed, give an opportunity 4[to the retrenched workmen who are citizens 
of India to offer themselves for re-employment and such retrenched workman] who offer 
themselves for re-employment shall have preference over other persons. 


5. | From the perusal of the above sections, it is apparent that the claimant/workman as defined under section 
2(s) has not been given the absolute protection against his retrenchment/termination. Section 2(00) of the 
Act defines the word “retrenchment”. Clause-(a), (b), (bb) and (c) have been carved out the exception 
from the definition of the retrenchment. Clause 2 (bb) which has been inserted by the Act 49 of 984 
w.e.f. 8.08.!984 had stated that when the services of the workman as a result of the non-renewal of the 
contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on its expiry. 


6. If the person has not come in any of the category then the claimant who has completed one year of 
continuous service cannot be retrench without compliance of the condition enumerated in section 25-F of 
the Act. Section 25-F of the Act infers that the claimants have no absolute right to remain in the 
employment of the management. The management can discontinue or retrench the workmen who have 
completed not less than one year of service under the employer if he has given a one month notice in 
writing indicating the reason for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired or he has paid the 
wages in lieu of notice period. The second condition is that the retrenchment compensation shall also be 
paid equivalent to 5-days of average pay for every completed year of continuous service. Besides this, 
appropriate government shall also be informed regarding the retrenchment. 


7. Here, in the present case, it is already established that after expiry of the contract with M/s G.A Digital 
Web World Pvt. Ltd., the service of the workman was continuously taken by the respondent and he had 
been paid the monthly remuneration as per minimum wages. So, agreement of M/s G.A Digital Web 
World Pvt. Ltd. has come to an end on 3].2.206, thereafter, the services has been continued till 
25.04.208. Management’s witness has not given any answer why the workman had worked till 
25.04.208 and has not come up for further cross-examination after l0.l2.2024, meaning thereby, the 
assertion of the claimant is true that he had lastly worked on 25.04.208 with the management. 


8. It is settled legal position that the claimant has to prove that he has been continuously working with the 
respondent for 240 days in a calendar year. Since, management has not brought any evidence contrary to 
the fact that the workman has not worked for 240 days continuously in a calendar year than this Tribunal 
has no option except to believe the version of the claimant that he has worked continuously l6.2.206 to 
25.04.208 directly with the management. 


9. Since, it is an admitted case that the management has not made compliance of the provision of Section 25- 
F of the Act, the termination of the workman is held to be illegal. Hence, issue no. 3 goes against the 
management and in favour of the workman. 


9386 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
RELIEF 


20. Now, the question arises as to what relief is given to the workman. In the present case, workman claimed 
that he had served with the management from 0.04.204 to 25.04.208.Normally, when the termination of 
the claimant is held to be illegal, reinstatement with full back wages shall be given to the workman. It has 
been held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case titled as Employers, Management of central 
P& D Inst. Ltd. vs. Union of India & Another, AIR 2005 Supreme Court 633 that it is not always 
mandatory to order reinstatement even after the termination is held illegal. Instead, compensation can be 
granted by the industrial adjudicator. 


2l. However, in the peculiar circumstances where the management’s stand is that 746 posts were 
recruited through competitive examination and the claimant’s services were availed only for stock gap 
arrangement for delivery of the post, relief of reinstatement with full back wages is not appropriate. Given 
the circumstances where the workman did the work for four years with the respondent management either 
through contractor or directly, a lump sum compensation of Rs. 5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lac only) is 
considered to be an appropriate relief. Hence, management is hereby directed to pay compensation of Rs. 
5,00,000/- to the claimant within two months of notification of this award, failing which the management 
shall also pay interest @ 9% per annum on the aforesaid amount from the date of award until realization. A 
copy of this award be sent to the appropriate government for notification under section |7 of the Act. The 
file is consigned to record room. 


Date: 2.06.2026 ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 763.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
एन.डी.एम.सी के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री अशोक कुमार के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-|॥|, नई दिल्‍ली, Tate (रिफरेन्स न.- 25/2023) को जैसा कि अनुलम्नक में 

दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है | 
[सं. एल- 420(/469/202-arearz(Sy)] 


सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 763.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 25/2023) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to N.D.M.C. and Sh. Ashok Kumar. 


[No. L- 420/69/20!2-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 
BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM —- LABOUR COURT NO. II, 
NEW DELHI 
LD. No. 25/203 
Sh. Ashok Kumar ys. N.D.M.C. 


Sh. Ashok Kumar 
S/O Late Sh. Bhorey Lal, 
R/O F-579, Mangolpuri, 
Delhi-0083. 
...Applicant/Claimant 
Versus 
The Director, 
N.D.M.C., Palika Kendra, 50 Floor, 
New Delhi-000I. 
... Management/respondent 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9387 


Counsels: 
For Applicant/ Claimant: 
Sh. Sunil Kumar, Ld. AR. 


For Management/ Respondent: 
Sh. Raghvendra Upadhyay, Ld. AR. 


Award 
09.03.2026 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (l) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 
0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India, through the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, vide its Order No. L-420/l69/20I2-IR(DU) dated 28.02.20i3, has been 
pleased to refer the following dispute between and for adjudication by this Tribunal in the following terms: 


“Whether the action of the management of NDMC in not granting compassionate employment to 
Shri Ashok Kumar S/o Late Shri Bhurey Lal is legal and justified? If not, what relief the 
workman is entitled to?” 


At the outset, it is important to mention here that the present case reflects the misuse of the 
legalmachineryfor appointment on compassionate grounds. 


In pursuance of the reference, the claimant appeared and filed his claim statement. He stated that his 
father Sh. BhureyLal, who was working with the management, expired on 9.02.2004. Thereafter, the 
claimant applied for appointment on compassionate grounds. He alleged that although the management had 
given compassionate appointment to 92 applicants, his claim was rejected without assigning any reasons. 


The management granted employment in its Fire Department to 9 persons in 2004, 8 in 2005, in 
2006, 5 in 2007, 44 in 2008, 80 in 2009, and 63 in 200. It also granted employment in its Civil 
Department to 72 persons in 2004, 8 in 2005, 48 in 2006, 38 in 2007, 43 in 2008, 33 in 2009, 
and7 in 200.According to him, despite large-scale appointments during the said period, he was denied 
compassionate appointment. Being aggrieved, he approached the conciliation officer and upon failure of 
conciliation, the present reference was made to this Tribunal. Therefore, the claimant has filed his claim 
seeking employment on compassionate grounds in lieu of services rendered by his deceased father. 


In response, the management filed a written statement stating that the present claim is a sheer 
misuse and abuse of the processof law as no right accrues in favour of the claimant as a matter of 
fundamental right to claim employment under the category of compassionate grounds. In fact, there are 
certain guidelines drafted by the department as per the DoPT Guidelines and other provisions under which 
such employments are governed,and the claimant did not fulfill the prescribed eligibility criteria. It was 
further stated that the present reference has been made in a mechanical and stereotype manner without 
considering the stand of the management. Hence, the management prayed for dismissal of the present 
claim. 


A rejoinder had also been filed by the claimant where he denied the averments made by the 
management in its written statement and affirmed the averments in his claim statement. 


From the pleadings of the parties, following issues were framed vide order dated 26..203: 


l. Whether the action of the management of NDMC in not granting compassionate employment 
to Shri Ashok Kumar S/o Late Shri Bhurey Lal is legal and justified? 


2. Ifnot, what relief the workman is entitled to?” 


To prove his case, the claimant examined himself as WWI. He reiterated the facts stated in the 
claim statement and relied upon the following documents: 


l. Minutes of meeting of the committee constituted for examining the cases of appointments on 
compassionate grounds. (Ex. ४४/७४७।/।) 


2. List of recommended cases of compassionate appointments duly attested by the management. 
(Ex. ४४७४ ।/2) 


3. List of rejected cases of compassionate appointments duly attested by the management (Ex. 
Wwi/3). 


9388 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


4. List of deferred cases of compassionate appointments duly attested by the management. (Ex. 
१४४७ ॥/4). 


5. List of daily wagers appointed during 2004. (Ex. WW ॥/5). 
6. Death certificate of the deceased father of the claimant (Mark A). 


7. Family details and correspondences with the management regarding compassionate appointment. 
(Mark B). 


During cross-examination, the claimant admitted that he raised the dispute regarding compassionate 
appointment after 8 years of his father’s death. He further admitted that he had no knowledge of the 
grounds and criteriaconsidered for compassionate appointment. He further deposed that his father passed 
away leavingbehind four dependents, namely himself, his elder brother, his elder sister and his younger 
brother. He admitted that his siblings were aware of his claim, however no ‘No Objection Certificate’ had 
been filed by them. 


In rebuttal, the management also examined one witness, Ms. Meena Kaushal, Deputy Director 
(Civil and Electrical Establishment). She deposed that the management, while considering and 
recommending numerous applications of such candidates, follows the guidelines of the DoPT, such as the 
seniority of the deceased, his age at the time of death, the dependents left behind by him, particularly 
unmarried daughters, the number of years of service left at the time of death, physical disability of the 
applicant, etc. She stated that the lists of recommended, rejected, and deferred cases were already on record 
and had been exhibited by the claimant himself. 


During her cross-examination, the witness admitted that the father of the claimant, Sh. Bhurey lal, was 
working as a Mate in the Civil Engineering department and expired on 9.02.2004. she further admitted 
that the claimant’s application for his appointment on compassionate grounds was rejected as per the policy 
and guidelines of DoPT after due consideration. She also admitted that the claimant’s younger brother, Sh. 
Sitaram, was receiving pension till attaining the age of 25 years. 


During the course of proceedings, some startling facts has been emerged. On 0.03.2025, the management 
produced the personal file of the claimant. It was revealed that the claimant’s younger brother, Sh. Sitaram, 
was shown to have received pension till 204 and was shown to be |5 years old at the time of their father’s 
death. However, the personal file containedmultiple affidavits with different date of birth of Sh. Sitaram 
and other family members. In one affidavit, Sh.Sitaramwas shown to be 22 years old at the time of death of 
his father.In the application addressed to the secretary, NDMC, seeking appointment on compassionate 
grounds, the claimant declared his own date of birth as 05.0.985.The elder brother’s date of birth was 
shown as .09.975, while the younger brother was shown to be born in 995. The date of birth of her 
elder sister, Smt. Krishna was shown as |5.05.97. The affidavit of Sh. Rajinder Kumar dated 07.06.2004 
states that his younger brother, Sh. Sitaram, was born on 0.2.!995. Another affidavit of the claimant, Sh. 
Ashok Kumar, also dated 07.06.2004, shows the date of birth of Smt. Krishna, the claimant’s sister, as 
0.0.985. In yet another affidavit of Sh. Rajinder Kumar dated 22..2004, he declared his own date of 
birth as 04.07.978. In another affidavit, Sh. Sitaramwas shown to have been born on 20.0.982, while the 
applicant, Sh. Ashok Kumar, was shown to have been born on 05.07.979. 


Further, the noting on the personal file showed that both Sh. Rajinder Kumar and the claimant Sh. Ashok 
Kumar were married, whereas Sh. Sitaram was shown as unmarried. The pension record broughts by the 
management reveal that Sh. Sitaram was shown to be entitled for family pension till he attained the age of 
25 years. His date of birth was taken on the basis of a medical examination as 989. Neither the year 982 
nor !995was takeninto consideration. Except for a medical certificate furnished by management, nothing is 
foundrecord to establish his age. There is no document to show whether any x-ray or a bone density test 
was conductedfor determining his age, and no such report or film in this regard has been placed on record. 
No reason has been assigned as to why the department deemed it necessary to medically examine Sh. 
Sitaram to establish his correct age. 


The mention of different age of Sh. Sitaram at different places, along with different age of the claimant Sh. 
Ashok Kumar in their affidavits, makes the claimant’s case doubtful. The claimant didn’t disclose at any 
point that he was married or unmarried. At some places, he is shown to have been born in !979, while at 
other places, his year of birth is mentioned as 985, and the noting on record suggests that he was married. 


Therefore, it appears that the claimant attempted to secure dual benefits, pension benefits to the younger 
brother up to the age of 25, despite claiming his year of birth as 995 or earlier, i.e., |982, and appointment 
on compassionate grounds, even though the claimant was already married, asnone of the several affidavits 
disclose the marital status of the claimant. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9389 


Considering the overall facts and circumstances, this Tribunal is of the view that the claimant is not entitled 
to compassionate appointment. Hence, issue no. | is decided against the claimant and in favour of the 
management. Consequent thereto, issue no. 2 also goes in favor of the management. 


In light of the above findings, the reference is answered against the claimant and in favor of the 
management. Accordingly, the claim of the claimant stands dismissed. A copy of this award be sent to the 
appropriate government for notification under section 47 of the I.D Act. The case file is consigned to 
record room. 


Dated-09.03.2026 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 764.—airearttrs विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
जामिया मिलिया इस्लामिया यूनिवर्सिटी; wastes इगीट्रोनिक्स प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और 
श्रीमती कुसुम के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय-॥|, नई 
दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 04/2023) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं, एल- 42025/07/2026/227-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 764.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 0/2023) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Jamia Millia Islamia University; EMDEE Eigitronics Pvt. Ltd. and Smt. Kusum. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2026/227-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDSUTRIAL TRIBUNAL — CUM —- LABOUR COURT-II, 
NEW DELHI 
LD. NO. 0/2023 
Smt. Kusum, W/o Sh. Kali Charan, 


R/o- House No. 48, Gali no. 3, Near Govt. Primary School-Mill Hard Colony, 
N.LT. Faridabad, Haryana-200I. 


Through- All India General Mazdoor Trade Union, 
70, Bal Mukund Khand, Giri Nagar, Kalkaji, New Delhi-009, 


VERSUS 


l. The Dy. Vice Chancellor, 
Jamia Millia Islamia University, 
Jamia Nagar, Okhla, New Delhi-!0025. 


2. EMDEE Eigitronics Pvt. Ltd., 
RZE-06, 0274 Floor, Mahaveer Enclave, Palam Dabri Main Road, 
Sector-0l-A, Dwarka, New Delhi-l0045. 


9390 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 
22.2.2025 


This is an application U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as “the Act’) 
filed by the claimant stating that she was working with the management as “Safai Karmachari” w.e.f. 
0.0i.20i and his last drawn salary was Rs. [4,000/- per month. She had been doing their work with 
diligently and honestly. Her service records were clean and she had not given any complaint so far. The 
employers had made the claimant’s signs on many blank papers, blank vouchers, blank agreement letters and 
blank appointment letters at the time of appointment during the service but did not give a copy of the same to 
the claimant. During the services, management never provided legal facilities like appointment letter, wages 
slip, leave book, attendance card, annual and festival holidays, ESI & PF etc. When the claimant demanded all 
the above mentioned legal benefits, the employer immediately became angry and in a spirit of revenge, 
without paying the earned salary to the workman from 0.08.209 to 02.09.209, without prior notice, without 
any notice charge sheet, without any rhyme and reason, claimant were illegally terminated by the management 
on 03.09.20I9. She had gone to the conciliation officer, but, no result was yielded. Hence, she had filed the 
present claim with the prayer that she be reinstated with full back wages. 


Management no. | has filed its WS. They have denied the averment made in the statement of claim. 
They submitted that she was not engaged directly by the M-! as her services had been hired through approved 
outsource agency M/s. Emdee Digitronics Pvt. Ltd., till 3.03.209 and thereafter, M/s Sharma Enterprises 
had been awarded contract w.e.f. 0!.04.209. Her services had been discontinued due to her unsatisfactory 
performance report, conveyed by the concerned Provost and the same was informed to her employer i.e. M/s 
Sharma Enterprises for her discontinuation. They also submitted that claim is liable to be dismissed. 


Management no. 2 has already been proceeded ex-parte vide order dated 06.0.2025. 
After completion of the pleadings vide order dated 0.04.2025, following issues have been framed i.e.:- 


(i) Whether there existed any relationship of employee and employer between the claimant and 
management no. |. 


(ii) Whether services of claimant had been terminated illegally and in violation of section 25F of 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 


(iii) Relief, if any. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. AR for the workman submitted that workman is not 
in touch with him since long to substantiate her claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in perusing her case, this Tribunal has no 
option but to dismiss her claim. Hence, claim stands dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this 
award is sent to appropriate government for notification under section |7 of the I.D. Act. Record of this file is 
consigned to record room. 


Date: 22.2.2025 ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 765.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
एमटीएनएल; स्टेलर डायनेमिक्स प्रा. लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री कृपा शंकर शर्मा के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-॥, नई दिल्ली, Tare (रिफरेन्स 
न.- 3॥/2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं, एल- 42025/07/2026/226-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 765.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 3/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to MTNL; Stellar Dynamics Pvt. Ltd. and Sh. Kripa Shankar Sharma. 


[No. L- 42025/07/2026/-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 939] 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDSUTRIAL TRIBUNAL - CUM —- LABOUR COURT-II, 


NEW DELHI 


I.D. NO. 3/2022 

Sh. Kripa Shankar Sharma, S/o Late Sh. Baij Nath Sharma, 
R/o RZB-24-A, Gali No.-07, Gurudwara Road, Mahavir Enclave, 
Palam, New Delhi-!0045. 


VERSUS 


l. MTNL, 
08, Bhikaji Cama Place, New Delhi-!0066. 


2. Stellar Dynamics Pvt. Ltd., 
C-48, 3" Floor, Community Center, Industrial Area, 
Phase-I, Nariina, New Delhi-0028. 


AWARD 
2.05.2026 


Item No. 02 


I.D. No. 3/2022 


2" May, 2026 


Present: 


Sh. Devendra Kumar, Ld. AR alongwith the claimant. 
None for the management no. . (MTNL) 
Sh. Ghanshyam Mishra, Ld. AR for the management no. 2. (Stellar Dyanmics) 


On the last date of hearing, after perusing the record, claimant was asked to clarify whether he 
has completed 240 working days with the management no. 2 in a single year. Ld. Counsel for the 
claimant submitted that he would produce a chart to clarify the working days of the claimant; 
however, instead of producing the chart, he has called the workman. He emphasized that it was a 
fixed term contract for two years and the respondent has terminated the workman illegally. 


Record of the present case states that claim was filed by the claimant, stating that he was 
appointed by the management no. 2 on the post of “Lineman” on |!.08.2020, and his last drawn 
wages were Rs. 9,864/- per month. It is the management no. 2 who has deputed to workman in the 
management no. |. He used to work sincerely; however, management no. 2 had illegally and 
unjustifiably terminated his services on 3.03.202! without any rhyme or reason and without paying 
the earned wages for the month of Jan., Feb., and March, 202! and without giving any notice or notice 
pay to him. Hence, he filed the claim. 


Both the managements have filed their respective written statements. Issues were framed on 
29.08.2022. On the last date of hearing, this Tribunal had noted down that workman has failed to 
complete the 240 days in a preceding year to his termination. 


For ready reference, the provision of Sections 2A, 2(00) & 25F of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) are required to be reproduced herein:- 


Section 2A: 
[2A. Dismissal, etc. of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute 


[()] Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches or otherwise 
terminates the services of an individual workman, any dispute or difference 
between that workman and his employer connected with, or arising out of, such 
discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be deemed to be an 
industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of 
workmen is a party to the dispute.] 


[(2)] Notwithstanding anything contained in section /0, any such workman as 
is specified in sub-section (7) may, make an application direct to the Labour 
Court or Tribunal for adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the 
expiry of forty-five days from the date he has made the application to the 


9392 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for conciliation of the 
dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal shall 
have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a 
dispute referred to it by the appropriate Government in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply in relation to 
such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute referred to it 
by the appropriate Government. 


(3) The application referred to in sub-section (2) shall be made to the Labour 
Court or Tribunal before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, 
dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise termination of service as specified in sub- 
section (/)). 


Section 2(00): 


“retrenchment” means the termination by the employer of the service of a 
workman for any reason whatsoever, otherwise than as a punishment inflicted by 
way of disciplinary action, but does not include- 


(a) voluntary retirement of the workman; or 

(b) retirement of the workman on reaching the age of superannuation if the 
contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned 
contains a stipulation in that behalf; or 

(bb) termination of the service of the workman as a result of the on-renewal of the 

contract of employment between the employer and the workman concerned on 
its expiry or of such contract being terminated under a stipulation in that 
behalf contained therein; or] 


(c) termination of the service of a workman on the ground of continued ill-health; ] 
Section 25F: 


25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.- No workman employed 
in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under 
an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until- 
(a) the workman has been given one month's notice in writing indicating the 
reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice has expired, or the workman has 
been paid in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice; 
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which 
shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay [for every completed year of 
continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months; and 
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate government [or 
such authority as may be specified by the appropriate Government by notification in 
the Official Gazette. ] 


Provision of Section 2A of the Act has been carved out in the year 967 when the 
amendment has been made whereby dismissal, retrenchment or termination of an individual 
workman is deemed to be the industrial dispute. Subsequently, another amendment was 
made in 200, whereby the appropriate government was relieved from applying of its minds 
while making a reference to the Tribunal in cases of discharge, dismissal and retrenchment 
of the individual workman. The workman may directly file the application after taking the 
recourse of conciliation upon failure of the conciliation proceedings after 45 days. The next 
rider is that the application must be filed before the Tribunal within three years from the 
date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination. 


Section 2(00) of the Act defines the retrenchment by the employer of the service of 
a workman for any reason whatsoever. However, five exceptions have been carved out 
where such termination does not fall within the definition of retrenchment. 


Section 25F of the Act imposes certain conditions upon the employer before 
terminating the employee. The first condition is that the workman shall be given the one 
month’s notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment and the period of notice. 
The second condition is that the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, 


[भाग Il—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9393 


compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay [for every completed 
year of continuous service] or any part thereof in excess of six months. The third condition 
is that the notice in the prescribed manner is served upon the appropriate government. The 
section 25F begins with the word that “No workman employed in any industry who has 
been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer”. Meaning thereby- 
the person can be retrenched without complying the condition (a), (b) & (c), if he has not 
completed one year of continuous service. 


Section 25-B of the Act defines the term “continuous service”. Clause-2 of the said 
section states that where a workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of 
clause () for a period of one year or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous 
service under an employer. Clause-2 of section 25-B of the Act is also required to be 
reproduced herein- 

Clause-2 of Section 25-B of the Act- 


(2) where a workman is not in continuous service within the meaning of clause 
(I) for a period of one year or six months, he shall be deemed to be in continuous 
service under an employer- 


(a) for a period of one year, if the workman, during a period of twelve 
calendar months preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be 
made, has actually worked under the employer for not less than- 


(i) one hundred and ninety days in the case of a workman employed below 
ground in a mine; 


(ii) two hundred and forty days, in any other case; 


(b) for a period of six months, if the workman, during a period of six calendar 
months preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made, has 
actually worked under the employer for not less than- 


(i) ninety-five days, in the case of a workman employed below ground in 
a mine; 


(ii) one hundred and twenty days, in any other case. 


Explanation.- For the purpose of clause (2), the number of days on which a 
workman has actually worked under an employer shall include the days on 
which- 


(i) _ he has been laid-off under an agreement or as permitted by standing 
orders made under the Industrial Employment (Standing Orders) Act, 
946 (20 of 946), or under the Act or under any other law applicable to 
the industrial establishment; 


(ii) he has been on leave with full wages, earned in the previous year; 


(iii) he has been absent due to temporary disablement caused by 
accident arising out of and in the course of his employment; and 


(iv) in the case of a female, she has been on maternity leave; so, however, 
that the total period of such maternity leave does not exceed twelve 
weeks. ] 


Here, the claimant himself has stated in his claim statement that he worked on the 
post of “Lineman” with the management no. 2 from |.08.2020 to 3.03.202]. If the period 
of work is counted from !.08.2020, then, the total number of days worked by the claimant 
with the management no. 2 is less than 240 days. The claimant actually worked only 233 
days i.e.: 


2 days in August, 2020, 
30 days in Sept, 2020 
3] days in Oct, 2020, 
30 days in Nov, 2020, 
3] days in Dec, 2020, 


9394 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


e 3] days in Jan, 202, 
e 28 days in Feb, 202] and 
e 3] days in March, 202] 


In these circumstances, when the workman has not completed 240 days in a 
calendar year, then, the protection against termination cannot be given. Therefore, the claim 
of the claimant is not maintainable. Hence, the claim stands dismissed. Award is passed 
accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to appropriate government for notification under 
section 7 of the I.D. Act, 947. Record of this file is consigned to record room. 


ATUL KUMR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 766.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
मदर डेयरी फ्रूट एंड वेजिटेबल प्राइवेट लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और मदर डेयरी He एंड वेजिटेबल वर्कर्स 
एकता यूनियन के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-॥, 


नई दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 33/203) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं. एल- 420/488/202-areaz(STy)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 766.— In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 33/203) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court-II, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd. and Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Workers Ekta 
Union. 

[No. L- 420/88/202-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW 
DELHI 


LD. NO. 33/203 


The General Secretary, 
Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Workers Ekta Union, 
C-70, Indra Enclave, 
Delhi-004. 
Versus 


The Factory Manager & General Manager, 
Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd., 
Fruit & Vegetable Unit, 

Mangolpuri Industrial Area, 

Phase-I, Delhi-0083. 


Present: None for the claimants. 


Sh. Lalit Bhasin, Ld. AR along with Sh. Rupam Sajjan, & Ms. Vishali (Proxy) for the 
management. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9395 


AWARD 
04.08.2025 


l. In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section () and Sub-section (2A) of Section 
0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, vide its Order No. L-420/88/202-IR (DU) dated 07.03.20I3 has been 
pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer, that is the Management of Mother Dairy 
Fruit & Vegetable (P) Ltd. and their workman for adjudication by this Tribunal, terms of which are as 
under: 


“Whether the action of the management of M/s Mother Dairy 
Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd. Mangolpuri signing settlement with a 
Union, when as a case to determine majority union is pending 
before RLC @ New Delhi is fair and justified? If not, what relief 
the union is entitled for? ” 


After receiving the said reference, notices were issued to both the parties. Both the parties have 
appeared. Claimants have filed their claim statement stating that the above said union is registered 
union under the Trade Unions Act, Govt. of NCT of Delhi, Department of Labour, 5 Sham Nath Marg, 
Delhi vide registration no. Fl0/DRTU/NWD/I0/03 and the union is also affiliated with CITU. Their 
address is owned by National Dairy Development Board, an autonomous body of the Government of 
India. The strength of the union at present is more than |35 out of the total strength of the employees of 
the management. The union is its general body meeting of the union held on 20.03.20I], elected a new 
set of office bearers/executive of the union for the year 20il-2. As per law, the union informed the 
same to the management vide letter dated 20.04.20I, but vide letter dated 25.04.20, the management 
informed to above said union that they are not recognized union of the management. On 29.0.2004, 
when the last time union elections held in the unit of management and thereafter the management and 
elected union did not conduct election in the unit. On 0.0!.2009, the union Mother Dairy Fruit & 
Vegetable Employee Union again signed the settlement with the management and they did not conduct 
the union election. When the Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Workers Ekta Union came to know about 
this settlement then every time the said union protests against the settlement which held between the 
Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Employees Union and management. On .!2.20l2, Mother Dairy 
Fruit & Vegetable Employees Union and management again made settlement without given any 
information to the other union and when the Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Workers Ekta Union 
came to know about the said settlement then immediately the Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Workers 
Ekta Union informed to the Labour Department and objected the said unfair and unjustified settlement. 
Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Workers Ekta Union is the majority union as it has a membership of 
more than 75% workers of the management. The action of the management is completely unfair and 
unjustified in signing settlement with Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Employees Union, when a case 
to determine majority union is still pending before the R.L.C., New Delhi. They made prayer that an 
order be passed in favour of the workmen. 


2. Management has filed its written statement denying the averment made in the claim statement. He 
also submitted that claim be dismissed. 


3. Claimant has filed the rejoinder denying the averment made in the written statement and affirmed 
the facts made in their claim statement. 


4. After completion of the pleadings vide order dated 8.02.204, following issues have been framed 
Le.t- 


(i) Whether the action of the management of M/s Mother Dairy Fruits & 
Vegetable Pvt. Ltd., Mangolpuri signing settlement with a union, when as 
a case to determine majority union is pending before RLC @ New Delhi 
is fair and justified? If so its effect? 


(ii) What relief the workman is entitled to? 
5. Examination in chief and cross-examination of the claimant has been recorded separately. 


6. Examination in chief of the management witness has been concluded. On 9.0.2022, claimant was 
found absent on repeated calls, therefore, right to cross examine the management witness by the claimant 
hereby closed. 


7. It is the matter of fact that the claimant has not been appearing since long, though, he has been 
cross-examined. It is further the fact that the management has filed the affidavit of evidence of its witness 
which remains unchallenged, unrebutted, where he has stated that the claimant’s union has no right to 


9396 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


raise the claim regarding his participation in the ongoing settlement between the management and the 
recognized union. It has been further stated by the management that the claimant union’s claim for grant 
of the status of a protected workman was rejected by Sh. R.K. Meena, Assistant Labour Commissioner 
(Central), New Delhi vide order dated 0.09.20l and the writ petition filed by the claimant’s union was 
subsequently dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court of Delhi vide order dated 08.05.2023. 


8. In light of the said fact, issue no | is decided against the workman and in favour of the management. 
Accordingly, the claim of the claimant stands dismissed. Reference is answered accordingly. A copy of 
this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification under section |7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 
Record of the case file is consigned to record room. 


ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer. 
Date: 04.08.2025 
नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 767.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
पूर्वी दिल्‍ली नगर निगम, नई दिल्‍ली के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री शेर सिंह के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4, नई दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 404/2024) को 
जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है | 


[सं, War-4202/49/202 -आईआर(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 767.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 04/202) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to East Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi and Shri Sher Singh. 


[No. L-4202/9/202-IR(DU)] 


SALONI, Deputy Director 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL 
CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - , 


NEW DELHI. 
ID No.04/202 


Shri Sher Singh S/o Sh. Har Lal (Ex-Safai Karmachari), Through Nagar Nigam Karamchari Sangh, Delhi Pradesh, 
P-2/624, New Delhi-0086. 


...Claimant 
Versus 


The Commissioner, East Delhi Municipal Corporation, 49, Udyog Sadan, Paptparganj, Industrial Area, Delhi- 
0092. 


... Management 
AWARD 


l. In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-L- 
4202/9/202 dated 2.07.202! under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the Act, for 
adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


‘Whether Sh. Sher Singh S/o Sh. Har Lal, (Ex-Safai Karamchari) is entitled for reimbursement of his 
Medical bills to the tune of 78.7,50,000/- from the management of East Delhi Municipal Corporation, as 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9397 


raised by Nagar Nigam Karmchari Sangh, Delhi vide letter dated 07.02.20792 If yes, to what relief is Sh. 
Sher Singh entitled and what directions ar necessary in this regard?’ 


Sh. Sher Singh Vs. The Commissioner, East Delhi Municipal Corporation. 


2. In the endorsement made in reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the 
dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal 
within fifteen days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite 
parties involved in the dispute. Despite directions so given, Claimant opted not to file the claim statement with the 
Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the managements. In pursuance 
to the notices sent, counsel for the claimant appeared some occasions. No claim statement was filed on behalf of 
workman despite repeated adjournments. Thus, it is clear that the workman is not interested in adjudication of the 
reference on merits. 


4. In these circumstances, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let 
this award be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section !7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, 
for publication. 


Date: 05.02.2026 Ajay Kumar Jain, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 768.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा (7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
मेसर्स इंडियन रिन्यूएबल एनर्जी डेवलपमेंट एजेंसी लिमिटेड, नई दिल्‍ली; मेसर्स मनीष कोचर्स सिक्‍योरिटी एजेंसी, नई 
दिल्ली के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री शशि कुमार के बीच औद्योगिक विवाद अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4, नई दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 785/2024) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है | 


[सं, एल-42025/07/2026/425 -आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 768.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 85/2024) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to M/s Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Ltd., New Delhi; M/s Manish 
Coacher Security Agency, New Delhi and Sh. Shashi Kumar, workmen. 


[No. L-42025/07/2026/25-(IR(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL 
CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - , 
NEW DELHI. 


ID ४०.।85/2024 


Sh. Shashi Kumar S/o Mangeram, Through Delhi Karamchari Sangh, Infront of Kalkaji Bus Depot, Govind Puri, 
New Delhi-009. 


...Claimant 
Versus 


l. M/s Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency Ltd., 
August Kranti Bhawan, 3" Floor, Bhikaji Cama Place, 
New Delhi-0066. 


2. M/s Manish Coacher Security Agency, 
B-ll, Harivansh Bhawan, RBCDDA Complex, Nangalraya, 
New Delhi-0046. 
... Management 


9398 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


l. In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-ND-25/I- 
25/2024-IR dated 6.07.2024 under clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section (2A) of Section l0 of the Act, for 
adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


‘Whether the services of the workman Shri Shashi Kumar S/o Late Mangeram, Ex-Security Guard have 
been terminated illegally and/or unjustifiably by the management of M/s Manish Coacher Security 
Agency contractor of M/s Indian Renewable Development Agency Ltd. w.e.f. 25.08.2023? If so, then what 
relief the workman concerned is entitled and what directions are necessary in this respect?’ 


2. In the endorsement made in reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the 
dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal 
within fifteen days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite 
parties involved in the dispute. Despite directions so given, Claimant opted not to file the claim statement with the 
Tribunal. 


3. On receipt of the above reference, notice was sent to the workman as well as the managements. In pursuance 
to the notices sent, none appeared on behalf of the claimant. No claim statement was filed on behalf of workman 
despite repeated adjournments. Thus, it is clear that the workman is not interested in adjudication of the reference on 
merits. 


4. In these circumstances, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let 
this award be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, 
for publication. 


Date: 3.04.2026 AJAY KUMAR JAIN, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 7 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 7769.— sitet विवाद अधिनियम (947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार, 
चीफ़ पोस्टमास्टर जनरल, नई दिल्ली; मेसर्स जी.ए. डिजिटल वेब वर्ल्ड प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, दिल्ली के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध 
नियोजकों और श्री शैलेंद्र कुमार और अन्य के बीच औद्योगिक विवाद अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-4, नई दिल्ली, पंचाट (रिफरेन्स न.- 244/207) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, 
प्रकाशित करती है| 


[सं, एल-40044/44/2047 -आईआर/(डीयू)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 7th August, 2026 


S.O. 769.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Reference No. 244/207) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal cum Labour Court-l, New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the 
employers in relation to Chief Postmaster General, New Delhi; M/s G.A. Digital Web World Private Ltd., Delhi 
and Shri Shailendra Kumar & ors., workmen. 


[No. L-400/4/207-(R(DU)] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL 
CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - , 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No.244/207 


Shri Shailendra Kumar & ors. Through All India General Mazdoor Union, 70, Bal Mukund Khand, Giri Nagar, 
Kalkaji, New Delhi-!009. 


...Claimant 
Versus 


l. Chief Postmaster General, Delhi Circle, Meghdoot Bhawan, New Delhi-!!000]. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9399 


2. M/s G.A. Digital Web World Private Ltd., Registered Office No.l, Hargovind Enclave, Vikas Marg 
Extension, Delhi-0092. 


... Management 
AWARD 


l. In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-L-400/4/207 
(IR(DU)) dated 2.08.20!7 under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the Act, 
for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


‘Whether the demand of the workmen Sh. Shailendera Kumar and others (mentioned in Annexure-A) for 
declaring them the permanent workmen of the Department of Posts is legal and/or justified and if so what 
relief are the workmen entitled to and what directions are necessary in this respect? 2. Whether the 
workmen Sh. Shailendra Kumar and others (mentioned in Annexure-A) are entitled for wages and others 
consequential benefits at par with the regular employees of department of Posts doing same and similar 
work from the date of initial appointment and if so what directions are necessary in this respect?’ 


Sh. Shailendra Kumar & ors. Vs. Chief Post Master General & anr. 


2. In the endorsement made in reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the 
dispute to file statement of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal 
within fifteen days of receipt of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite 
parties involved in the dispute. 


3. The A/R for the claimant along with claimant Sh. Sheelendra Kumar have recorded their statement 
separately stating that they want to withdraw the present case which was referred by Central Labour Office for 
adjudication as the case pertaining to the same relief is pending before the Hon’ble CAT. 


4. In these circumstances, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let 
this award be sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, 
for publication. 


Date: 03.02.2026 AJAY KUMAR JAIN, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 0 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4770.--- औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम t947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार बैंक ऑफ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय न॑ 4 धनबाद के पंचाट 
(48/2005) प्रकाशित करती है। 


[सं, एल - 20I2//2005- आई आर (बी-ा)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the !0th August, 2026 


S.O. 770.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. 48/2005) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
No. ,Dhanbad as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Bank of India their 
workmen. 


[No. L-202//2005- IR(B-ID] 
SALONI, Deputy Director 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 () (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 48/2005 


Parties: 
Employers in relation to the management of Bank of India, Zonal Office, 
Dhanbad 
AND 


9400 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Their Workmen 
Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 
Presiding Officer 


Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri D.K. Verma, Ld. Advocate 


For the workmen — :- Sri D. Mukherjee, Ld. Advocate 


State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Banking 
Dated 02/07/2026 
AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of 
Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947) Government Of India through the 
Ministry of Labour, vide its Order No.L-!202//2005-IR(B-ID) dated 30/05/2005 has been pleased 
to refer the following dispute between the employer i.e. management of Bank of India, Zonal Office, 
Dhanbad and their workman namely Sri Subhas Saw for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Bank of India, Dhanbad Zone, Dhanbad in 
terminating Sh. Subhas Saw from the services of the Bank in subordinate cadre i.e. as 
Driver from May, 2004 is justified? If not, to what relief the concerned workman is 
entitled ?” 


2; On perusal of the case record it transpires that previously the present reference was decided 
in favour of the workman vide order dated 30.03.20I5 but when the same was challenged by the 
management before the Hon’ble High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in W.P. (L) No. 4397 of 205, 
the Hon’ble Court was pleased to set aside the Award passed by this Tribunal vide order dated 
02.07.20i9 and the matter was remanded to this Tribunal for taking fresh decision after hearing both 
sides. 


3. The case of the workman as per the written statement filed on his behalf is that the workman 
Subhas Saw has been working as permanent Driver of Bank of India since 0..99] continuously 
to the satisfaction of the management. He has been working as Driver and driving vehicles of the 
Bank for the purpose of business of the bank and management is the owner of aforesaid vehicles. He 
has been rendering service and producing goods for the benefit of the Bank Management but the 
management had been paying him wages at the rate of Rs. 340/- and subsequently Rs. |700/- from 
0.0.994. The concerned workman represented before the management several times for his 
proper wages and benefit at par with other employees of the Bank and at the initial stage the 
petitioner was assured by the management for regularization and wages at par with other employees 
and he waited on the assurance of the management but unfortunately all of sudden the management 
terminated the service of the workman on May 2004 by stopping him from duty. The petitioner had 
put in continuous service from 0.li.99l to May 2004 and had put in more than 240 days 
attendance in each calendar year. His service was terminated when he insisted for regularization and 
proper wages. He was terminated without following the mandatory provision of Section 25-F of the 
I.D. Act. He represented before the management for illegal and arbitrary termination and seeing no 
other alternative raised industrial dispute that ended in failure and that ultimately resulted in the 
present reference. The action of the management in terminating the services of the concerned 
workman was illegal, arbitrary and against the principle of natural justice as well as against the 
provision of Section 25-F of the I.D. Act and he prayed to answer the reference in favour of the 
workman. 


4. On the other hand the case of the management as per the written statement cum rejoinder is 
that the present reference is not legally maintainable. The issued reference for adjudication is vague, 
indefinite and cannot be adjudicated. Sri Subhas Saw has filed his written statement describing 
himself as disputant claiming that he was the workman of the Bank. No employer-employee 
relationship exists between the disputant and the Bank Management. He was never selected by the 
Bank Selection Committee of the Bank as per the Recruitment Rules of the management. He was 
never employed as employee of the Bank. As per the Regulation 26 of the Bank of India Service 
Regulations, !979 the Bank Officers in Scale IV to VII are allowed to use the Bank Car for personal 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 940I 


purpose for which they require personal driver also and to enable them to engage for personal driver 
the wages to be paid to the personal drivers are also reimbursed by the Bank at specified level. Such 
drivers are identified and engaged purely on personal basis without any supervision and control of 
the Bank and similarly there is no service condition fixed by the Bank for personal driver and 
therefore there is no employer-employee relationship between the Bank and the said driver at any 
point of time. The petitioner was engaged by the Bank Officers in their personal capacity from time 
to time to drive the car provided to them by the Bank for their personal purpose. Such agreement was 
entirely between the Officer concerned and the petitioner in their personal capacities. The petitioner 
has worked as personal driver of the Bank Officers for certain period and he is advancing his claims 
to treat him as an employee of the Bank and is demanding for his absorption in the employment of 
the company. The petitioner was personal driver in personal capacity, he cannot vest any right or 
claim on the latter for bank employment. He was neither appointed nor terminated by the Bank from 
the services of the Bank and therefore the question of adjudication for termination of the services of 
the petitioner does not arise and he is not entitled to any relief. In rejoinder it has been stated that the 
petitioner has never worked as permanent driver of the Bank of India and he was never appointed as 
a driver of the Bank and again it has repeated the facts already stated and denied the stand taken by 
the workman in his W/S. 


5. The petitioner has also filed a separate rejoinder to the W/S of the management in which he 
has denied all the claim of the management. 


6. Issue 


“Whether the action of the management of Bank of India, Dhanbad Zone, Dhanbad in 
terminating Sh.Subhas Saw from the services of the Bank in subordinate cadre i.e. as Driver from 
May, 2004 is justified? If not, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled?” 


7. In support of his case the workman has adduced the documents related to his salary from 
August [992 to June 999 and Log Book from June 2003 to April 2006. 


8. No oral evidence has been adduced from the side of the workman. 

9. On the other hand the management has not adduced any oral or documentary evidence. 

0. Heard both sides and perused the materials on record. 

Il. The Ld. Counsel on behalf of the workman has submitted that he had been working as 


Driver in Bank of India since 0i.l!.99l and had been driving vehicles as employee of the 
management but he was not being paid monthly wages at par with the permanent employees and 
therefore he raised the issue and being annoyed by the same the management illegally terminated his 
services w.e.f. May 2004 without issuing any reason and therefore prayed to set aside the termination 
and reinstate him. 


I2; On the other hand the Ld. Counsel on behalf of the management has submitted that the 
petitioner was never appointed by the management as employee of the Bank nor he was ever issued 
any appointment letter and therefore no employer-employee relationship exists between them. As per 
the regulation 26 of the Bank of India the Bank Officers in Scale IV to VII were allowed to use 
Bank’s Car for personal purpose and they were also allowed to engage personal driver as per their 
requirement and the wages to be paid to them by the said officer were to be reimbursed by the bank 
up to the specified level and so the personal driver of the bank’s executive is not the employee of the 
bank and the present petitioner accordingly is not entitled to any relief in this case and has no right to 
regularization or reinstatement. 


3. On perusal of the documents adduced from the side of the workman though not exhibited it 
transpires that there are two types of documents, first one is the copy of register of the Log Book 
from June 2003 to April 2006 of the Bank of India and the second one is the details of salary given 
to the petitioner Subhas Saw from August !992 to June 999 which also bears the signature of the 
petitioner Subhas Saw after receiving the payment in each and every month and the second set of 
documents are the copy of Motor Car Log Book from June 2003 to April 2006 and it also contains 
the name of Subhas Saw with the number of vehicle. This also contains the details of Journey, 
Kilometers etc. 


These documents have not been disputed by the management and in its W/S the 
management has admitted the employment of Subhas Saw as personal driver of the Bank Executive. 


4. In view of the documents as well as the period of engagement of the petitioner Subhas Saw 
from year 99! to May 2004 it is established that he has continued his job for quite long period and 
therefore the relationship of the employer-employee is created between the petitioner and the 


9402 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


management even though he was not issued any appointment letter and the above documents add the 
authenticity as well as genuineness of the case of the workman and in such circumstances the action 
of the management of Bank of India , Dhanbad Zone, Dhanbad in terminating Sri Subhas Saw from 
the services of the Bank in subordinate cadre i.e. as Driver from May, 2004 is held not at all justified 
and he is entitled to reinstatement by way of relief but as this is year of 2026 and about 2 decades 
have passed, the direction of reinstatement is not appropriate rather the management is directed to 
make payment of Rs. 0 Lakh as compensation to the workman Subhas Saw within a period of 3 
months from the date of publication of this Award. The reference is answered accordingly. 


Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 40 अगस्त, 2026 
का.आ. 774.—3ielPra विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार बोकारो थर्मल डिबीज़न के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, 
अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण -सह- श्रम न्यायालय, 
धनबाद-॥, के पंचाट (संदर्भ Wear 30/20I9) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


fe. एल-20042/62/2049-आईआर (सीएम-।)] 


जयदीप यादव , उप निदेशक 
New Delhi, the 0th August, 2026 


S.O. 77l.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 30/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-I as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
Bokaro Thermal Division and their workmen. 


[No. L-2002/62/209— IR (CM-I)] 


JAIDEEP YADAV, Deputy Director 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 (l) (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 30/209 


Parties: 
Employers in relation to the management of Bokaro Thermal 
Division, DVC, Bokaro Thermal, Bokaro 
AND 
Their Workmen 
Present: ShriSachindra Kumar Pandey 
Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :-Sri B.K. Jha, Advocate 


For the workmen — :-Sri D. Mukherjee, Advocate 


State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 22/07/2026 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9403 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of 
Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947) Government Of India through the 
Ministry of Labour, vide its Order No. L-2002/62/209-IR(CM-I) dated /l/20l9 has been 
pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer i.e. management of Bokaro Thermal 
Division, DVC and their workman through Joint General Secretary, Bahujan Mazdoor Union at 
Mines Rescue Station, Dhansar, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the supply worker Shri Rajesh Kumar has been unjustifiably denied the 
seniority in the empanelment list drawn from Contract workers of DVC, BTPS despite 
working from 987 in the BTPS, DVC plant? If yes, then what remedies he is entitled 
to?” 


2 The case of the workman as per the written statement filed on his behalf is that the worker 
concemed was engaged as a Supply worker under a contractor namely M/s S.P. Yadav at the Bokaro 
Thermal Power Station of Damodar Valley Corporation, Bokaro since February, !987. On 
30.08.992 and thereafter on 7.09.993 a memorandum of settlement/tripartite agreement was 
reached in between the parties duly participated by the management of DVC, The Contractor, DVC 
Labour Union, Bokaro Thermal and United Contactors’ Workers Union, Bokaro memorandum of 
settlement/tripartite agreement, the Chief Engineer-l, BTPS on 0.09.998 prepared a 
panel/seniority list of the contract labourers at BTPS but the name of the concerned worker was not 
included in the said list. On the date of preparation of panel i.e. on 0.07.998 the cut off date was 
28.02.997 and the total number of man days till cut off date of the worker comes to total of 298] 
days, therefore as per the number of days worked by the worker concerned the position of the worker 
in the panel list should have been determined at Sl. No. 5. The contractual labourers with less 
number of man days than that of the worker concerned have been empanelled and subsequently 
regularized in the service and therefore the worker concerned has right to claim in the seniority list 
of the panel of workers. The letter dated 9.07.2007 issued by the management is arbitrary, malafide, 
illegal and contrary to determination as made by them and therefore the worker has suffered the 
monetary benefits as per settlement dated 30.08.992 and 7.09.993 and accordingly the workman 
is entitled for grant of benefits with retrospective effect. The workman also approached the Regional 
Labour Commissioner (Central) for deciding the issue and on |2.04.2002 after making enquiry with 
regard to the claim of the petitioner and going through the detail report of the Assistant Labour 
Commissioner with regard to the total number of mandays/attendance of the petitioner from 987 to 
200l at the Operation & Maintenance Department of BTPS made a request to the management 
concemed to implement the settlement during 30 days and submit the implementation report and at 
last it was prayed to direct the concerned management to place the name of the concerned workman 
in the appropriate place i.e. at Serial No. 5 in Seniority list of [998 as per the seniority retirement by 
Regional Labour Commissioner on the basis of man days and absorb the worker concerned as 
regular employee as identical worker with much lesser number of man days and grant all the 
monetary benefits as per the memorandum of settlement dated 30.08.992 and 7.09.993. 


3. On the other hand the management has filed its written statement on 28.0.202] in which it 
has submitted that the reference is not maintainable either in fact or in law. The panel of seniority of 
supply workers/labourers was prepared on the basis of directives of Labour Commissioner Bihar in 
the year 4999 by the committee under the Chairmanship of Dy. Labour Commissioner, State of 
Bihar, Bokaro Steel City in terms of Tripartite agreement dated 30.08.992 for payment of extending 
additional benefit of Rs. 405/- per month by DVC as inability to absorb them. Accordingly two lists 
one of 594 and another of 95 were prepared and approved by the Director (HRD) wherein name of 
Shri Rajesh Kumar along with other 3 labourers did not figure in the seniority panel as they were 
engaged by the contractor to perform job of their Munsi/Supervisor not as a worker. On the basis of 
non inclusion of their names in the above list additional benefits of Rs. 405/- was not given to them. 
The seniority of contractor workers was determined as recommended by the committee headed by 
Dy. Labour Commissioner State of Bihar, Bokaro Steel City in terms of tripartite agreement dated 
30.08.992. So the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central) has no jurisdiction to conciliate 
Industrial Dispute as such. Rajesh Kumar should have approached for above Industrial Dispute to the 
appropriate authority under Labour Department i.e. Government of Jharkhand and not RLC (C) as 
per jurisdiction. The Seniority panel so determined by the committee was published on all the notice 
board vide letter no. BT/CE/IR(R)-!90 dated 6.03.998 but Shri Rajesh Kumar failed to represent 
to DLC, State of jurisdiction and the Chairman of the Committee and so he was not entitled for the 
above benefits. As per tripartite agreement financial benefit has been given to those who had been 


9404 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


enlisted and not to be given any benefits with retrospective effect to Rajesh Kumar the petitioner. As 
per letter of RLC (C) dated 6.08.2002 the name of Rajesh Kumar was not included in the seniority 
list but he falsely mentioned that his name was included. Further the committee was formed in terms 
and conditions mentioned in the Addl. Director (IR) Letter dated ३].05.2006 and dated 0.02.2007 
for consideration of the seniority with the following conditions: 


i) An undertaking is to be taken from the individual contractor workers that they will not claim any 
additional benefit from retrospective effect. 


ii) After obtaining the above undertaking the committee was constituted to determine the inter- 
seniority amongst the four contractor labour including Rajesh Kumar. 


iii) After determination of seniority his position was duly fixed at the bottom of the existing list of 
the contractor labours at BTPS. 


iv) The additional benefit was to be given after fixation of seniority. 


v) Sri Rajesh Kumar did not furnish undertaking but having been paid additional benefits since 
20.05.2006 and his seniority was correctly being placed. 


vi) Sri Rajesh kumar was neither party to the settlement dated 30.08.992 and 2.08.993 as he did 
not come within the purview of the workmen his job being of supervisory in nature. He was never 
workmen under the contractor M/s. S.P. Yadav under BTPS and his total works/mandays worked as 
a supervisor can not be considered equal to the other workers for considering his seniority so he was 
excluded. 


vii) He was engaged as Munsi/Supervisor to look after supervisor job and preparation of bills of said 
contractor M/s S.P. Yadav. 


जा) RLC (C) is not the competent authority to determine seniority as the Labour Commissioner 
Bihar Patna was signatory of the Tripartite Agreement dated 24.!2.999. As per the High Court 
Order in the W.P. No. l0I/200l, Hon’ble Court observed that petitioner move to ALC Patna who 
recommended the case of petitioner but it is found that petitioner approached to the ALC (C) 
Hazaribagh who was not competent authority as the said agreement was made before the Labour 
Commissioner Bihar. 


(ix) As per enquiry report submitted by Labour Commissioner Hazaribagh it shows that Rajesh 
Kumar worked since 997 whereas his letter forwarded dated 26.04.994 shows that he himself had 
written that he worked from 989 and also duly certified by the concerned contractor M/s S.P. Yadav 
on the body of letter that he has been working since 989. 


(x) Rajesh Kumar was out of the purview of the workmen and not covered by the tripartite 
agreement to avail any benefit. 


(xi) Rajesh Kumar not enlisted as supply worker so payment of benefit of Rs. 500/- per month was 
discontinued and at last it was prayed to decide the reference in favour of the management of DVC 
and reject the claim of the petitioner. 


4. The case record shows that additional written statement has also been filed on behalf of the 
workman in which they have stated that Central Government being the appropriate Government u/s 
2(a) of the I.D. Act, 947 has been pleased to refer this present industrial dispute for adjudication. 
The concerned workman has been working as contractor’s labour since 987 under the Registered 
Contractor namely M/s. S.P. Yadav at DVC Bokaro Thermal Power Plant in the job of DVC which 
is perpetual and perennial in nature. The management of DVC at BTPS has few other contractors 
employed in the job of the Plant and the Management of DVC records and maintains the inter-se 
seniority list of such contract workers working on the job which is so done so that such supply 
workers who have been employed for decades together against the permanent job of DVC are 
permanently regularized under the management of DVC itself on the basis of the number of mandays 
worked by such workers and they are paid all such monetary and other benefits at par with the 
workers directly appointed by the DVC having been put on the rolls of the DVC, BTPS. The 
management of DVC entered into Tripartite Agreement with such Contractor’s Workers Union from 
time to time and has been executing agreements resolving all the disputes. By virtue of 
Memorandum of Settlement/Tripartite Agreement dated 30.08.992 and 7.09.993 between the 
management of DVC and DVC Labourers’ Union Bokaro Thermal and United Contractors’ Workers 
Union, the Chief Engineer-l BTPS prepared a panel/seniority list of such Contractors’ Workers on 
0.07.998 in which the name of the workman concerned namely Rajesh Kumar was not included 
although he has completed 298] mandays upto the cut off date 28.02.997 which is illegal whereas 
in the seniority position he must have been at Serial No. 6, which has deliberately ignored. It has not 


[भाग I—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9405 


only deprived him of regularization of his service under DVC but has caused heavy monetary loss. 
The concerned workman approached the management of DVC BTPS by way of writing various 
letters but nothing was done by the management and being aggrieved by the same the workman filed 
a Writ before the Hon’ble High Court of Jharkhand, Ranchi in CWJC No. I0! of 2000(R) in which 
the Hon’ble Court directed the workman to approach the competent authority or to raise an industrial 
dispute and thereafter the concerned workman again made representation before the management but 
again nothing was done and thereafter he raised grievance before the Regional Labour Commisioner 
(Central) Dhanbad in which the management raised baseless objection. The concerned workman 
prayed before the R.L.C. (Central) Dhanbad or physical verification of mandays of the work 
performed by the workman and for determination of his seniority on the basis of mandays worked in 
which the RLC (Central) Dhanbad entrusted the job of spot examination of records maintained by 
the DVC to the ALC (C) Hazaribagh vide his order dated 6.0.202] and thereafter the physical 
verification on their records lying with the management were carried out and the report was 
submitted dated 25.0!.2002 wherein the details of mandays right from the year 987 to February 
997 for which he worked has been noted. The A.L.C.(C) Hazaribagh has also verified the 
attendance of the workman from the P.F. and other relevant documents from March, 997 to 
December, 997 and thereafter mandays worked has been verified till 200 as the management 
failed to produce the records after February, l997 and on that basis the R.L.C.(C) Dhanbad directed 
the management of DVC vide letter dated 2/6.04.2002 certifying the mandays worked by the 
concemmed workman Rajesh Kumar. As the concerned workman was working at O&M Deptt of 
BTPS regularly from the year 987 and also meeting the required number of attendance in a year and 
his name must have been included in that period for the registration as per the Memorandum of 
Settlement. In such a position the management of DVC initially granted the benefits of the 
settlement from 30.08.992 to 7.09.993 but surprisingly his name could not find place in the panel 
and the direction of the R.L.C.(C) Dhanbad was not complied by the management. Subsequently the 
genuine case of the workman was realized by the management and ultimately the Additional 
Director DVC by his order dated ]" February, 989 asked the Chief Engineer-l, BTPS to include 
the name of Rajesh Kumar along with 4 others in the seniority list but the approval to the inclusion 
was accorded in the year 2006 which is gross injustice on the part of the management of DVC and 
ultimately it was prayed to hold the action of the management of DVC BTPS is illegal and improper 
and regularize him with retrospective effect with all the monetary benefits. 


5. A rejoinder has also been filed to the additional written statement of the workman by the 
management in which the management has taken the stand inter-alia that Sri Rajesh Kumar was 
engaged in Supervisory Job/Munshi and he does not come within the purview of ‘Workman’ and has 
denied all the stand taken by the workman in the additional W/S and repeated the stand taken in its 
WIS. 


6. A rejoinder of the workman has also been filed separately to the W/S of the management in 
which all the points and grounds taken by the management has been denied and the stand taken in its 
W/S and additional W/S has been repeated. 


‘Ts Issue 


“Whether the supply worker Shri Rajesh Kumar has been unjustifiably denied the seniority 
in the empanelment list drawn from Contract workers of DVC, BTPS despite working from !987 in 
the BTPS, DVC plant? If yes, then what remedies he is entitled to?” 


8. In support of his case the workman has examined himself as WW-|. He has also submitted 
the following documentary evidence: 


Exhibit ४४-] — Verification of mandays letter dated 25.0.2002 written by the ALC (C) Hazaribagh 
to RLC (C) Dhanbad 


Exhibit W-2 — Letter dated 2/6.04.2002 of RLC (C) Dhanbad to the Chief Engineer-I, BTPS DVC, 
Bokaro Thermal, Bokaro 


Exhibit W-3 — Certificate dated 2.0.998 issued by M/s. S.P. Yadav 
Exhibit W-4 — Pass for contractor labourer 
Mark ‘X’ for Identification - Photocopy of payment register. 


9. On the other hand the management has examined ॥५४-] Tanisha Silvi and MW-2 Partha 
Sarathi Mukherjee. The management has submitted the following documentary evidence: 


Mark ‘Y’ for Identification — Office Circular dated 27.0.20I 


9406 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Mark '४/]९ for Identification — Affidavit of Shiv PujanYadav 


Mark ‘Y/2’ for Identification — Letter dated 06.0.2025 of M/s. S.P. Yadav to the Branch Manager, 
SBI, BTPS, Bokaro Thermal 


Mark ‘Y/3’ for Identification — Letter dated 29.09.2025 of M/s. S.P. Yadav to the Branch Manager, 
SBI, BTPS, Bokaro Thermal 


0. Heard both sides and perused the materials on record. 


Il. The Ld. Counsel on behalf of the workman has submitted that the concerned workman 
Rajesh Kumar was working since February, !987 in DVC as Contract worker continuously for more 
than 240 days in every year but he has not been given the benefit of the Tripartite Agreement with 
the management in the year !992-993 and in the year !998 the seniority list that was published does 
not include his name whereas his name should have been included on Serial No. 5 and he was denied 
the benefit and raised industrial dispute before the ALC Hazaribagh. Management says that he was 
working as Supervisor/munshi whereas he has never worked as Supervisor or Munshi. The ALC has 
also made spot verification of the documents of the management and found that he was working as 
supply worker. He was also being paid by the management and ultimately it was prayed to allow this 
case in favour of the workman. 


2. oner Rajesh Kumar is the eldest son of the Contractor M/s. S.P. Yadav and he was 
supervising his work of contract and working as Supervisor/Munshi and that is why the name of 
Rajesh Kumar was not included in the list of panel of the contractor workman because he is not 
workman under the definition of section 2(s) of the LD. Act, 947. The Tripartite Agreement was 
prepared on the direction of the Labour Commissioner, Bihar, Patna on 30.08.!997 and therefore the 
Central Government Regional Labour Commissioner has no jurisdiction and for all these things it 
was prayed to hold that the workman is not entitled to any relief. 


3. On perusal of the oral testimony of WW-! Rajesh Kumar it appears that as per his affidavit 
he was working as contract worker since February, !987 in DVC continuously for more than 240 
days in every year but he has not been given the benefit of the Tripartite Agreement with the 
management in the year 992-993 and in the year !998 the seniority list that was published does 
not include his name whereas his name should have been included on Serial No. 6 and he was denied 
the benefit and raised industrial dispute before the ALC Hazaribagh. Management says that he was 
working as Supervisor whereas he has never worked as Supervisor or Munshi. The ALC has also 
made spot verification of the documents of the management and found that he was working as 
workman. He was also being paid by the management and ultimately it was prayed to allow this case 
in favour of the workman. In cross-examination he has stated that in the panel list of !998 of the 
DVC his name was not included and therefore he has filed this case. He had approached the Hon’ble 
Jharkhand High Court two times for this. In CWJC No. 0I/2000 it was directed by the Hon’ble 
High Court to approach the competent authority and file representation there. As per the same he 
filed representation before the RLC Dhanbad. He was engaged to work in DVC by the contractor 
M/s. S.P. Yadav. The Tripartite Agreement was entered into on 03.08.992 and 7.09.993 and as 
per the same Dy. CLC Bokaro is the competent authority. 


4. As regards the documentary evidence of the workman, Exhibit W-I is the letter dated 
25.0.2002 written by the Assistant Labour Commissioner (C) Hazaribagh to the RLC (C) Dhanbad 
regarding verification of mandays of the work performed as a contract labour in D.V.C. BTPS, 
Bokaro Thermal vis-a-vis empanelment of the name in the list which reveals that the ALC 
Hazaribagh visited the BTPS on 22.0.2002 to conduct the verification and assessment of mandays 
work by Sri Rajesh Kumar under the contractor and the management produced the muster roll and 
wages sheet from 987 to !997 in which the mandays was worked out and the same has been 
detailed in this letter. It also reveals that after February 997 to 200! the workdays done by Rajesh 
Kumar was assessed from PF Statement and return that has also been detailed therein. Exhibit W- 
2is the letter dated 2/6.04.2002 written by RLC (C) Dhanbad to the Chief Engineer-I, BTPS DVC, 
Bokaro Thermal, Bokaro regarding empanelment of the workers deployed by the then contractors at 
BTPS in accordance with the Memorandum of Settlement dated 30.08.992 and 24.2.999 and writ 
petition filed by Sri Rajesh Kumar bearing No. CWJC 0i/2000 dated 4.08.200l and it was 
enquired into the said matter by ALC(C) Hazaribagh and the detailed report was submitted to this 
office. The total number of attendance as per the same has been detailed in this letter and accordingly 
it was requested to implement the said settlements within 30 days from the date of the receipt of this 
letter and submit the implementation report to this office to take further steps as per provision of I.D. 
Act, 947. Exhibit W-3 is the Certificate dated 2.0.998 issued by M/s. S.P. Yadav, Proprietor in 
which it has been certified that Sri Rajesh Kumar son of Sri Shiv Pujan Choudhary of Bokaro 
Thermal has been working under the contract as a Mazdoor for work in DVC, BTPS ‘B’ (O&M) 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9407 


Coal Handling Plant since 6.02.987. Exhibit W-4 is the copy of Gate Pass of the contractor 
labourer in the name of Rajesh Kumar issued by CISF, Government of India, BTPS (DVC) Bokaro 
which shows that he has the access at the actual place of work and was permitted to go there through 
this pass. Another document is Mark ‘X’ for identification which is the photo copy of the payment 
register in the name of the contract Mazdoors in which on Serial No. 4 the name of Rajesh Kumar 
has been mentioned. 


5. Now as regards the evidence of the management, ४-। Tanisha Silvi, Manager H.R. of 
BTPS, DVC, Bokaro Thermal, Bokaro has deposed that Rajesh Kumar is the eldest son of the 
Contractor M/s. S.P. Yadav and he was supervising his work of contract and working as Munshi and 
that is why the name of Rajesh Kumar was not included in the list of panel of the contractor 
workman because he is not workman under the definition of section 2(s) of the I.D. Act, !947. The 
Tripartite Agreement was prepared on the direction of the Labour Commissioner, Bihar, Patna on 
30.08.997 and therefore the Central Government Regional Labour Commissioner has no 
jurisdiction and for all these things it was prayed to hold that the workman is not entitled to any 
relief. She has further stated that she has identified the photo copy of the office circular dated 
27.0.20, photo of notary affidavit of S.P. Yadav dated 3.09.999, monthly payment sheet dated 
06.0.2025 and photo copy of Ex-gratia payment sheet dated 29.09.2025 marked ‘Y’ to ‘Y/3’ 
respectively for identification. In cross-examination she has stated that she has never made the 
physical verification of the concerned workman. She has not filed any document to show that the 
concemed workman was working as supervisor. The appropriate government of the DVC is Central 
Government. The name of the workman was not included in the list of panel because he was working 
as supervisor. 


MW-2 Partha Sarathi Mukherjee is Senior Manager H.R. of BTPS, DVC, Bokaro Thermal, Bokaro 
and he has stated that Rajesh Kumar was eldest son of contractor M/s. 8.70. Yadav and was working 
as Munshi and Supervising the work of his father. On 30.08.!992 Tripartite Settlement was done on 
the direction of Labour Commissioner, Patna under the chairmanship of Dy. CLC, Bokaro. On 
6.03.998 the Seniority list of the labourers were published by the management but Rajesh Kumar 
had not given his written application deliberately to Dy. CLC Bokaro and later on he raised this 
dispute before the ALC, Hazaribagh which is not valid. All the labourers have given undertaking on 
the direction of DVC Head Office but Rajesh Kumar had not given the same. Vide notification dated 
9.08.20i0 the appropriate government became the Central Government and prior to that the ALC, 
RLC of the Central Government had no right to interfere in the matter of DVC. In cross-examination 
he has stated that he was appointed in year 20l0. He has made supervision of Rajesh Kumar. He has 
no circular or notification regarding the work of Rajesh Kumar as Munshi. On seeing the letter dated 
04.06.200l the witness says that it may be that in the year 2002 DVC was under the Central 
Government. This witness has avoided the answer of the question whether he has filed any document 
before the Court to show that Rajesh Kumar was working as Supervisor. 


6. Now as regards the documentary evidence of the management, on perusal of the first 
document that is mark ‘Y’ for identification it appears that this is an office circular dated 
27.0.20i which reveals that consequent upon the amendment of the Industrial Dispute Act 947 
vide Notification dated 9.08.20l0 and 5.09.200 of the Government of India, Ministry of Labour 
& Employment, the Central Government would be the Appropriate Government for establishment of 
the DVC under the I.D. Act. The Second document is mark *१/? for identification that is photo 
copy of the affidavit of S.P. Yadav which reveals that he is also known as Shiv Pujan Choudhary but 
it has not mentioned anything regarding the concerned workman Rajesh Kumar as the management 
is claiming that he was working as Supervisor/ Munshi of S.P. Yadav. The third document is mark 
*Y/2’ for identification which is photo copy of letter of Shiv Pujan Yadav to the Branch Manager, 
SBI, BTPS, Bokaro Thermal regarding the disbursement of monthly payment for the month of 
September 2025 to different workers from M/s. S.P. Yadav A/c No. !!209875646 and which bears 
the name of Rajesh Kumar on Serial No. 3] as worker. The fourth document that is mark ‘Y/3’ for 
identification is photo copy of letter of Shiv Pujan Yadav to the Branch Manager, SBI, BTPS, 
Bokaro Thermal regarding the disbursement of Ex-gratia payment for the period from 0.04.2024 to 
3.03.2025 to different workers from M/s S.P. Yadav A/c No. 209875646 and this also bears the 
name of Rajesh Kumar on Serial No. 3 as worker. 


7. As regard the contention of the Ld. Counsel on behalf of the management that the petitioner 
Rajesh Kumar does not come under the purview of definition of the workman as he was working as 
Supervisor/Munshi of his father contractor M/s. S.P. Yadav and so his name was not included in the 
empanelment but in support of his contention he has not been able to submit even a single 
documentary evidence which has also been admitted in Para-27 of the cross-examination of ०७४-। 
Tanisha Silvi and MW-2 Partha Sarathi Mukherjee has avoided the answer of this question in Para- 


9408 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


23 of his cross-examination. On the other hand Exhibit ४७-।, Exhibit W-2, Exhibit W-3 and Exhibit 
W-4 go to prove that Rajesh Kumar was working as contract labour in the D.V.C., BTPS, Bokaro 
Thermal and on verification it was found genuine and these documents also reveal the mandays from 
987 to 997 and this also reveals regarding the P.F. Statement of Rajesh Kumar. He was also issued 
a Gate Pass which proves his entry and availability at the place of work as contract worker and the 
copy of wage register of Rajesh Kumar as well as the others has also been submitted which further 
corroborates the case of the Rajesh Kumar that he was working as contract labour in D.V.C., BTPS. 
Not only this, the documents submitted on behalf of the management (Mark ‘Y/2 and ‘Y/3’for 
identification) also reveal that Rajesh Kumar was made payment in his account as worker from the 
account of contractor M/s. S.P. Yadav and therefore, the contention of the Ld. Counsel on behalf of 
the management that Rajesh Kumar was not working as contract labour is hereby rejected. 


8. Now as regard the contention of the Ld. Counsel on behalf of the management that on the 
basis of directive of the Labour Commissioner, Bihar in the year 999 by the committee under 
chairmanship of Dy. Labour Commissioner, State Bihar, Bokaro Steel City in terms of Tripartite 
Agreement dated 30.08.92 prepared list of empanelment and therefore the appropriate authority in 
this case is State Government whereas this case has been referred to this Tribunal by the Central 
Government, is also not acceptable in view of admission of MW-I in Para-29 of her cross- 
examination that the appropriate government of the D.V.C. is Central Government and therefore 
even if the seniority list was prepared on the direction of the Labour Commissioner, Patna, Bihar 
there is no bar for the workman Rajesh Kumar to raise the industrial dispute before the ALC/RLC 
(Central). 


9. Thus in view of the ALC’s spot verification report, provident fund proof, gate pass and 
payment list of the wages available on the case record this Tribunal is of the opinion that Rajesh 
Kumar has been able to establish that he has been working as contract labour in D.V.C., BTPS since 
987 therefore it is held that the supply worker Sri Rajesh Kumar has been unjustifiably denied the 
seniority in the empanelment list drawn from the contract workers of D.V.C., BTPS despite working 
since 987 under BTPS D.V.C. Plant and accordingly he is entitled to the inclusion of his name in 
the seniority list and the management is directed to include his name in the seniority panel and 
regularize him w.e.f. February, 987 with all the consequential benefits. The reference is answered 
accordingly. 


Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour& Employment, 
Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 0 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4772.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 7 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार बीबीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में कन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-।, के पंचाट 
(संदर्भ संख्या 53/2002) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


fe. एल-20042/4/2002-आईआर (सीएम-।)] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the ]0th August, 2026 


S.O. 772.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 53/2002) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-I as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL, and their workmen. 


[No. L-2002/I/2002— IR (CM-D] 


JAIDEEP YADAV, Deputy Director 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 9409 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 () (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 
Reference Case No. 53/2002 


Parties: 
Employers in relation to the management of Kusunda Area 
of M/s. BCCL, Kusunda, Dhanbad 
AND 
Their Workmen 
Present: ShriSachindra Kumar Pandey 
Presiding Officer 


Appearances: 
For the Employers :-Sri S.N. Ghosh, Advocate 


For the workmen — :-Sri D. Mukherjee, Advocate 


State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 
Dated 02/07/2026 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of 
Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947) Government Of India through the 
Ministry of Labour, vide its Order No. L-2002//2002-IR(C-I) dated 09/05/2002 has been pleased 
to refer the following dispute between the employer i.e. management of Kusunda Area of M/s. 
BCCL, Dhanbad and their workman through Vice President, Mine Mazdoor Union, Dhanbad for 
adjudication by this Tribunal: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of M/s BCCL in not regularizing Sri Sushil 
Kumar Singh as Loading Supervisor/Loading Munshi is fair and justified? If not, to what 
relief is the concerned workman entitled and from what date?” 


2, The case of the workman as per the written statement filed on his behalf is that the 
concerned workman namely Sri Sushil Kumar Singh is a permanent employee and he was 
transferred as sampling attendant 0 Dhansar Colliery in November 999 and he was directed to 
report for duty to the Officer Incharge for loading of coal under office order no. BCCL/Dhan/A- 
6/99/799 dated 28..999 issued by the Project Officer of Dhansar/Industry Colliery and he was 
assigned the responsibilities of supervision of over loading/under loading of coal in wagons which 
was not in consonance with the designation of the loading attendant. In the above capacity of 
supervising the over loading/under loading of coal he was permanently made to work in the 3™ shift 
at Dhansar Railway Siding where from the coal is loaded in wagon. The remaining I“ and 2™ shift 
for the same job, two loading supervisors have been posted. The workman has not been issued any 
authorization for working as loading clerk/loading supervisor only for the purpose of evading 
responsibility of the management to regularize the workman on the job he is doing and which will 
also entitle him for the wages payable to the loading clerk in view of the regular deployment of the 
workman as loading supervisor/ loading munshi w.e.f. Jan 200l. The action of the management in 
not regularizing Sri Sushil Kumar Singh as Loading Supervisor/Loading Munshi is not fair and 
justified particularly in view of the fact that the workman is exclusively managing the 3™ shift and 
during the same job which his co-worker Sri Y.P. Singh and Kapildeo Singh are doing with I“& 2" 
shift respectively. At last it was prayed to answer the reference in favour of the workman. 


3. On the other hand the case of the management as per the written statement cum rejoinder 
dated 0.2.2002 filed on its behalf is that Sri Sushil Kumar Singh initially was appointed under the 
Coal Control Organization and subsequently on its closure Sri Singh was transferred and posted at 
Dhansar Colliery in the month of November 999. Sri Singh is presently designated as Sampling 
Attendant in Grade “F” under SLU Grade “E”. While he was posted at Dhansar Colliery his existing 


940 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


designation and scale of pay was that of sampling attendant and hence he has been posted to Dhansar 
Colliery siding to look after the job of loading of wagons. His job included only to look after loading 
of wagons which is not the same job as that of loading clerk. It was further submitted that since Sri 
Singh is a sampling attendant, he was allowed to look after the job of loading of wagon and as such 
in no way Sri Singh be considered for regularization on the post of loading clerk as the scale of pay 
as well as the grade of loading clerk differs from the sampling attendant in which the workman is 
still working without any force by the management. It was further submitted that the workman has 
claimed his regularization as Loading Supervisor/ Loading Munshi which is not in tune with the 
actual state of affairs. The workman should either have claimed for regularization as loading 
supervisor or for regularization as loading Munshi in particular but inspite of that workman has 
claimed for regularization on the basis of either of which is illegal and ill motivated. He cannot claim 
regularization as loading supervisor/loading Munshi as his nature of job differs from that of 
sampling attendant. By way of rejoinder the management has admitted the case of the workman to 
the extent that he was transferred to Dhansar Colliery in November |999 and under the office order 
as mentioned but he has further stated that it is incorrect to say as would be evident in the office 
order dated 28.!.999 that he was asked to work as loading supervisor. The management has denied 
the rest of the stand taken by the workman in different paragraphs of the written statement and lastly 
prayed that Award be passed that the workman concerned is not entitled to any regularization as 
claimed. 


4. A separate rejoinder has also been filed on behalf of the workman denying all the claims and 
stands taken by the management in its written statement and repeating the claim of the regularization 
of the workman. 


a Issue 


“Whether the action of the management of M/s BCCL in not regularizing Sri Sushil Kumar 
Singh as Loading Supervisor/Loading Munshi is fair and justified? If not, to what relief is the 
concerned workman entitled and from what date?” 


6. In support of his case the workman has submitted the following documentary evidence: 
Exhibit १४-। — Copy of Office Order dated 07.07.2006 
Exhibit W-2 — Copy of Office Order dated 3.07.2006 
Exhibit W-3 — Copy of Office Order dated 8.07.2006 
Exhibit W-4 — Copy of Office Order dated 7.08.2006 
Exhibit W-5 — Copy of Office Order dated 7.0.203 


7. On the other hand the management has examined MW-! Ghanshyam Prasad Sinha in 
support of his case and submitted following documentary evidence: 


Exhibit -। — Copy of Office Order dated 28..999 


Exhibit M-2 — Copy of Letter dated 4.09.200I written by Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda 
Area to the ALC (C) Dhanbad in case of non-regularization of the workman Sushil Kumar Singh. 


8. Heard both sides and perused the materials on record. 


9. The Ld. Counsel on behalf of the workman has submitted that the workman Sushil Kumar 
Singh has been shown as Sampling Attendant in the Office Order dated 28.!.999 but that is an 
error which was corrected later on vide office order dated 3.07.2006 and his designation is 
Sampling Assistant not Sampling Attendant. The management is taking from him the job of 
supervision of wagon under loading and over loading since 999 but he has still not been regularized 
as loading supervisor/loading munshi like that of Sri Y.P. Singh and Kapildeo Singh. His work is of 
permanent nature and therefore claimed his regularization. 


0. On the other hand the Ld. Counsel on behalf of the management has submitted that the 
workman Sushil Kumar Singh is Sampling Attendant and so he cannot be regularized at the post of 
loading supervisor/loading munshi because nature of job of both these post are different from each 
other and prayed to reject the claim of the workman. 


Il. On perusal of the documentary evidence of the workman i.e. Exhibit १४-। which is office 
order dated 07.07.2006 issued by the Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda Area it transpires that 
the workman Sushil Kumar Singh who was previously transferred from Dhansar Colliery to Area 
Office vide letter dated 03.06.2006 is hereby re-posted at Gondudih Colliery in his existing capacity 
under Sales & Dispatch Department keeping in view the Ref. Case No. 53 of 2002 and accordingly 


[भाग I—a€ve 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 94i] 


he was released from Area Office w.e.f. !0.07.2006 with directive to report for duty to Project 
Officer/Agent, Gondudih Colliery. Exhibit W-2 is the Office Order dated 3.07.2006 issued by Dy. 
Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda Area and on its perusal it is evident that the designation of the 
workman Sushil Kumar Singh that has been indicated as Sampling Mazdoor in the Office Order 
dated 07.07.2006 should be read as Sampling Assistant and thus it is clear that his correct 
designation is Sampling Assistant and not Sampling Attendant or Mazdoor that has been mentioned 
in the written statement of both the parties as well as in the Office Order dated 07.07.2006. Exhibit 
W-3 is the Office Order dated 8.07.2006 issued by the Project Officer, Gondudih Colliery which 
shows that Sushil Kumar Singh has now been transferred to Gondudih Colliery in his existing 
capacity under Sales & Dispatch Department and therefore he is directed to report for his duty to the 
Manager Gondudih Colliery for further assignment of work. Exhibit W-4 is the Office Order dated 
7.08.2006 and by this order the workman Sushil Kumar Singh, Sampling Assistant and one Sri 
Satrudhan Singh, Loading Clerk in Gondudih Colliery have been directed to supervise the coal 
transporting work from the Gondudih Colliery coal stock to the Railway Siding, K.D.S.-2 and 
maintain the entire record of the same and keep the same. Exhibit W-5 is the Office Order dated 
7.0.203 issued by the Project Officer, Gondudih Colliery by which the workman Sushil Kumar 
Singh was attached with Md. Sagir Alam, Sr. Manager (Mining), Gondudih Khas Kusunda Colliery 
and he will work under his supervision. 


2. As regards the evidence of the management, MW-Il Ghanshyam Prasad Sinha who is 
working as Welfare Inspector at Kusunda Area Office of M/s. BCCL has deposed that the workman 
was initially appointed in the office of coal controller and on its closure the workman was transferred 
to Dhansar Colliery siding in the year !999 vide office order dated 28..999 and his duty was to 
collect sample from the siding and get it tested from the laboratory. Though he was asked to look 
after the loading and unloading of wagons at Dhansar Siding as per office order but he could not 
perform the same and preferred the job of sampling attendant and accordingly he did the same. The 
salary of the workman is that of the sampling attendant which he was getting while working at the 
office of the coal controller. The work of sampling attendant is not that of loading munshi/loading 
supervisor and he is not legally entitled for regularization as such as he was transferred from coal 
controller office after its closure. In cross-examination he has stated that he cannot say all details of 
the area that the concerned workman is working in Dhansar Colliery. He has denied the suggestion 
that the workman is looking after the job of loading supervisor. 


3. The documentary evidence of the management i.e. Exhibit -। which is the Office Order 
dated 28..999 issued by the Project Officer Dhansar/Industry Colliery says that vide office order 
no. 2849 dated 22..999 of the Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda Area, the workman 
namely Sushil Kumar Singh and 3 others named therein who have been posted in Dhansar shall be 
doing the work that has been mentioned against their name and designation at Dhansar Siding and 
they will contact the concerned officer of Dhansar Siding for their work. Exhibit M-2 is the letter 
dated 4.09.200l written by the Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda Area to the ALC (C) 
Dhanbad regarding the industrial dispute for non-regularization of Sri Sushil Kumar Singh and in 
Paragraph-2 of the same he has admitted that Sushil Kumar Singh has been directed to look after the 
job of wagon loading at Dhansar Siding inter-alia. 


4. Admittedly the concerned workman was appointed initially in the office of coal controller 
and on its closure he was transferred to Dhansar Colliery siding in the year 999 vide office order 
no. 799 dated 28..999 (Exhibit M-) and at the same time on perusal of Exhibit W-2 which is 
office order dated 3.07.2006 issued by Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda Area it is clear that 
his designation was Sampling Assistant though by mistake on several places it has been wrongly 
mentioned as Sampling Attendant and the Office Order dated 28..999 (फटा. ]) is self-evident 
that the workman Sushil Kumar Singh was placed to supervise the work of wagon under loading/ 
over loading and that is why the reference order speaks about the adjudication whether the workman 
is entitled for regularization on the post of Loading Supervisor/Loading Munshi. Office Order dated 
7.08.2006 (Exhibit W-4) also makes it clear that after the workman Sushil Kumar Singh was 
transferred to Gondudih Colliery he was again deputed to supervise the work of coal transporting 
and maintain the entire record for the same. In Paragraph-2 of the letter dated 4.09.200] issued by 
Dy. Chief Personnel Manager, Kusunda Area in the name of ALC (C) Dhanbad (Exhibit M-2) also 
the management has admitted that the workman Sushil Kumar Singh has been directed to look after 
the job of Wagon Loading at Dhansar Siding and ७०७४ has also admitted the same though he 
further added that but the workman preferred the job of sampling attendant but he has no 
corroborating documentary evidence of it that he preferred to act as sampling attendant instead of the 
assigned job of supervision of loading and unloading of wagon so this portion of his oral evidence 
can not be relied and so all these things go to establish that though the designation of the workman 
Sushil Kumar Singh was Sampling Assistant, since the year 999 itself he was doing the work of 


942 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


supervision of the wagon loading /unloading and as the work of supervision of wagon loading and 
unloading is perennial and permanent nature of job and the concerned workman is doing this job for 
such a long time, this Tribunal is of the opinion that he is entitled for regularization as Loading 
Munshi. 


5. Thus on the basis of the above discussion of the facts, circumstances and materials available on 
the case record this Tribunal finds and holds that the action of the management of M/s. BCCL in not 
regularizing Sri Sushil Kumar Singh as Loading Supervisor/Loading Munshi is neither fair nor 
justified and he is entitled to be regularized as Loading Munshi since January 200. The reference is 
answered accordingly. 


Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour& Employment, 


Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 0 अगस्त, 2026 


का.आ. 4773.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 44) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, 
केन्द्रीय सरकार बीबीसीएल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्यायालय, धनबाद-।, के पंचाट (संदर्भ 
संख्या 35/2009) को प्रकाशित करती है, 


fe. एल-20042/4/2009-आईआर (सीएम-])] 
जयदीप यादव, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the !0th August, 2026 


S.O. 773.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 35/2009) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Dhanbad-I as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
BCCL, and their workmen. 


[No. L-2002/4/2009— IR (CM-I)] 


JAIDEEP YADAV, Deputy Director 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.l,DHANBAD 
In the matter of reference U/S 0 () (d)& (2A) of I.D.Act. 947. 


Reference Case No. 35/2009 
Parties: 
Employer in relation to the management of NEE Department, Koyla 
Bhawan Of M/s. BCCL, Koyla Nagar, Dhanbad 
AND 
Their Workman 


Present: Shri Sachindra Kumar Pandey 


Presiding Officer 
Appearances: 
For the Employers :- Sri N. Nath, 0.5. Legal H.Q 
For the workman :- None. 
State : Jharkhand. Industry:-Coal 


Dated 22/07/2026 
AWARD 

In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub —section (2A) of 
Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947),Government Of India through the 
Ministry of Labour, vide its Order No.L-2002/4/2009 -IR(CM-I) dated 29/05/2009 has been 
pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer i.e. management of NEE Department, 
Koyla Bhawan of M/s. BCCL, Dhanbad and their workman through Divisional Secretary, Bihar 
Colliery Kamgar Union, Saraidhella, Dhanbad for adjudication by this Tribunal: 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 


SCHEDULE 


“i) Whether the demand of the Bihar Colliery Kamgar Union from the management 
of NEE Department of M/s. BCCL for correction in the seniority list of EDP personnel, 
T&S Gr. D working in different areas/reg. stores and HQ office of BCCL and 
cancellation of promotion given vide letter dated 0.02.2008 is justified and legal? 

ii) To what reliefs are the workmen concerned entitled?” 


943 


FINAL SENIORITY LIST OF JR. D.E.O./JR. P.V.O. IN TECH. GR. “0! WORKING IN 
DIFFERENT COLLIEIRIES AREAS/H.QTRS. OF BCCL. 


SL Name Qualification Date of Apptt. Date of Entry in Place of Posting 

No. Present Grade 

l. Sri Lalu Yadav B.A (Hons) 6.2.94 28.0.95 Mohuda Unit (RS 

Com. Cent.) 

2: Ashok Kr. Shaw B.Com 5.9.92 2..95 RS Lodna Area 

3. Sanjay Kr. Gupta B.A. 5.9.92 24.i.95 |-do- sd 

4. Pradip Kr. Saw M.Com 5.9.92 2.i.95 RS Lodna 

5. Biswanath Ghosh M.Com. 8..93 25..95 RS Bhowra 

|6. | Mantosh Banerjee B.Com. 20..92 28.i.95 Lodna Area 

7. Abhijit B.Com(Hons) 29.4.94 28..95 RS Bhowra Area 
Bhattacharjee 

8. | ; Subir Mazumdar B.Com 20..90 .2.95 CS Ekra 

iam Rama Shankar B.Com(Hon) 2.9.92 .2.95 PB Area 
Tiwary 

0. Sushil Kr. B.A. 9.9.88 .2.95 RS Kusunda 
Soren(ST) 

l]. Murari Singh B.A. 30.5.90 .2.95 |-do- sd 

2. Uday Shankar Paul | B.Com 25.2.92 .2.95 RS C.V.Area 

3. Surendra Kr. Verma | M.A.(Hindi) 23..93 .2.95 RS Lodna Area 

4. Dilip Kumar (SC) B.Com.LLB 28.9.93 2.2.95 CS Ekra 

5. Abhay Kr. Singh B.A. 0.2.84 2.2.95 Bhowra R.S 

6. Shib Shankar Ghosh | B.Com 6.3.93 6.2.95 RS Moonidih 

7. Smt. Aruna Sinha LA. 25.9.90 8.2.95 Moonidih WJA 

8. Sri A.K.Sinha LA. 28.9.93 8.2.95 |-do- sd 

9. Rakesh Kumar B.A. Pt.-I 23.7.92 8.2.95 Mohuda Unit 

20. S.N.Ahmed Khan LA. 2.2.9] 8.2.95 Lodna Area 

2]. A.K. Mishra Il.Com 0.4.87 8.2.95 RS WJA 

Moonidih 

22), Vinod Paul B.Com(Hons) 22..93 8.2.95 jedoe "= | 

23, Satyadeo Sharma B.Sc. 02.5.89 9.]2.95 RS Kusunda 

24. Sri R.P.Srivastava B.Sc., MBA 22.9.89 2.2.95 RS Sudamdih 

25. B.K. Srivastava M.A. 9.2.04 6.2.95 dost? 2-82 | 

26. Trilochan Mahato B.Com 5.0.90 26.2.95 CV Area 

27. M.K. Mandilwar M.A.(Hist.& SOCIO) | 2.5.92 2..96 Kustore Area. 

LLB 

28. Md. Imtiyaz Ahmad | Pt-IBA 22.2.9 29..96 RS Katras Area 

29. Suresh Lal Verma BA 29..90 30..96 doe = = - | 

30. Pijush Vagad B.Com(Hons) 7.3.93 2.2.96 Bastacolla Area. 

3l. Ranjeet Kr. Rawani_| B.A. 29..90 3.5.96 RS Block-II Area. 

32. V.K. Tiwari B.Com(Hon) 4.6.93 9.9.96 Kustore Area. 

33. D.K. Singh Matric 9.9.89 9.9.96 PB Area 

34. Smt. Sadhana Devi__| LA. 8.7.93 9.9.96 Bhalgora 

35. Sri Chandra B.Com LLB 5.9.92 9.9.96 Kustore Area 
Shekhar Prasad 

36. B.K. Banerjee B.Sc.(Hons) 7.2.92 9.9.96 |-do- sd 

37. D.K. Gupta B.A. 3.5.94 9.9.96 Bhalgora 

38. Sailendra Nath I.Com 8.5.93 9.9.96 Bastacolla Area 
Dutta 

39. Muneshwar Prasad B.A. 9.6.93 9.9.96 Kustore Area 

40. Soumendar LSc. 30.6.94 9.9.96 Lodna Area 


944 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : AUGUST I5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Bhattacharjee 
4l. L.H.K.N.Sahdeo B.Sc. 993 9.9.96 EDP Koyla 
Bhawan 
42. Suresh Kr. Mahato B.Com 5.4.9] 9.9.96 Bhalgora 
43. J.P. Das LA. 7..93 9.9.96 Barora Area 
44. Md. Arman Ansari B.Sc., P.G. Dip. in 26.6.94 9.9.96 CS Jealgora 
Com. Programme 
45. Arun Kumar B.A.(Hons) 2..92 9.9.96 Barora Area 
46. Nelesh Kumar LSc. 8..94 9.9.96 Bastacolla Area 
47. Sandip Banerjee B.A. 9.]2.9] 9.9.96 |-do- sd 
48. Kallol Bhattacharjee | I.Sc. 7.8.89 9.9.96 |-do- sd 
49. Hridyanand Yadav Matric 2.4.93 9.9.96 Chandodih 
Colliery 
50. Lakhandeb Rawani_| Matric ae | 9.9.96 Barora Area 
SI. Sri S.K. Singh LA. 2.9.93 9.9.96 CS Kusunda 
52. Krishana Kishore LA. a 9.9.96 Bhalgora 
Mahato 
53; G.C.Napit LA. 7.7.92 9.9.96 Barora Area 
34. Narayan Kumhar LA. 8.8.90 9.9.96 ies, = | 
55. Sunil Kumar LSc. 4.|.9] 9.9.96 Loyabad 
56. Rajkishore Sahu B.A.(Hons) 3.6.9] 8.6.96 RS Mohuda 
37. Tapan Kr. B.Sc. 3.9.9] 8.6.96 a | 
Chakraborty 
58. Kedar Singh B.Sc. 8.5.93 8.6.97 |-do- sd 
59. Raj Kishore Mishra | B.Sc. 6.3.93 8.6.97 PB Area 
| 60. | Ram Krishna Yadav | MA LLB 5..87 8.6.97 |-do- sd 
6l. Sachida Nand BA(Hons) 5.9.94 8.6.97 CCWO 
Pandey Saraidhella 
62. Someshwar B.Com 7.2.92 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
Chattoraj 
63. Mukund Ram B.A. LLB Pt.I 27.3.93 8.6.97 |-do- sd 
64. Biplab Sen B.Sc. 6.2.93 8.6.97 RS Katras 
65. Nandlal Mistry B.Com(Hons) 9.6.92 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
a] : Gyanendra Pratap MA(Soci) 3..94 8.6.97 किक 
Singh 
67. Syed Md. Akram B.A.(Hons)& Dip in | 42.7.93 8.6.97 RS Lodna 
software Technology 
| 68. | ४ Pradip Kr.Ghosh B.Com 2.9.94 8.6.97 Bastacolla Area 
eu Ram Kunwer MA(Soci) 27.5.93 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
Ram(SC) 
70. Ram Yatan MA LLB 6.3.93 8.6.97 Moonidih Area 
WJ 
7I. Bankim Murmu(ST) | B.Com 2.9.9] 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
72. Inderdeo MA(Hindi) 28.4.93 8.6.97 fe 
Paswan(SC) 
73. Bharat Kabidas(SC) | B.A.(Hons) 22.7.94 8.6.97 RS Sinidih 
74. Anil Kr. Mahato B.Com. 3.7.94 8.6.97 Sudamdih 
75. Ram Sewak Bind B.A. 3.3.90 8.6.97 RS Block-II Area 
76. Gulam Haider B.A. .8.92 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
77. Madan Mohan B.Sc. 2.0.9 8.6.97 Sudamdih 
Mahato 
78. Rabindra Prasad B.Com(Hon) 20.7.94 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
79. Sri Sada Nand Pd. B.A. 2.2.94 8.6.97 RS Katras 
Singh 
Ea Syid Md. Mazhar B.Com 27.2.93 8.6.97 Moonidih WJ 
Alam Area 
8l. Mahendra Madayama 8.6.90 8.6.97 P.B.Area 
Paswan(SC) 
82. S.K. Bhattacharjee B.A. 8.6.93 8.6.97 Moonidih WJ 


Area 


[भाग AVE 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 


94I5 


83. Ramanand Ram B.A. 4..92 8.6.97 RS Block-II Area 
84. Kartik Mistry B.A. (Hons) 3.2.92 8.6.97 edo | 
85. Manoj Kr. Singh B.Com 2.9.93 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
| 86. | Uttam Kr. Seal B.A. 4..90 8.6.97 Block-II Area 
87. Manoj Kumar B.Com(Hons) 2.9.9] 8.6.97 RS Lodna 
88. Amitav Dey B.Com. Sarre 8.6.97 Bhalgora 
| 89. | Sunil Prasad B.A. .2.89 8.6.97 RS Katras 
kcal Swapan Kr. Mondal | B.Sc. 2.2.89 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
(SC) 
9l. Satyendra Kumar B.A.(Hons) 26.2.90 8.6.97 Kusunda Area 
92. Awadh Kishore Jha | B.A. 26.2.90 8.6.97 RS Sinidih 
93. Jagan Shaw B.A. 23.7.94 8.6.97 RS Katras 
94. Baldeo Prasad B.Com 20.7.94 8.6.97 |-do- sd 
95. Tarun Sinha B.A. 9.4.90 8.6.97 PB Area 
ea Rajendra Pd. M.A 3.9.93 8.6.97 PB Area 
Pandey 
97. Tarak Nath B.Com 24.2.93 8.6.97 fe 4 
Chakraborty 
की 5 Surya Deo B.Com(Hons) 5..93 8.6.97 a 
Choudhury(SC) 
ae Shiv Shankar B.Com 2.2.94 8.6.97 fc 
Pandey 
00. | Tarun Kr. B.Sc. 23.9.94 8.6.97 RS Bhowra 
Mukherjee 
0I. Kaleshwar Yadav B.Sc.(Hons) DCO 3.0.92 8.6.97 Moonidih WJA 
02. | Ramesh Chand B.Com 22.9.92 8.6.97 RS Bastacolla 
Rawani 
03. | Krit Kamal Singh B.Com 24.0.94 8.6.97 Kusunda Area 
04. | Rajesh Kr. Sahay B.Sc. 9..95 8.6.97 EDP Deptt. Koyla 
Bhawan 
05. | Dipu Kumar B.A. Pt. I 6..93 8.6.97 RS Block-IT Area 
06. Nilanjan Das B.Sc.(Hons) 8.8.94 8.6.97 Sudamdih 
07. | Abhijit Das LSc. 30.2.94 8.6.97 RS Katras 
08. | Manoj Kr. Singh M.Com. 3.2.94 8.6.97 RS Lodna 
09. Smt. Lila Das Matric 3.2.93 8.6.97 Kustore Area 
l0. | Smt. Sangita Devi LA. 7.9.94 8.6.97 R.S. Lodna Area 
/]. Sri Ashok Kr. Matric .3.94 8.6.97 RS Barora 
Srivastav 
2. | Malay Kr. i ntl a 8.6.97 RS Mohuda 
Chakraborty 
I3. | Manoj Kr. Shaw B.Com(Hon) 5..95 8.6.97 EDP Koyla 
Bhawan 
I4. | Devendra Nath M.A. 2.2.94 8.6.97 Bhalgora Area 
Singh 
I5. | Subrata Banerjee B.Sc. 7.2.96 8.6.97 CV Area 
l6. | Nand Lal Pandey Ee od =. oO 8.6.97 RS Bastacolla 
Area 
l7. | Kaushik Chatterjee | I-A. Dip in Comp. 8.8.94 8.6.97 CS Jealgora. 
I8. | P.P.Choudhury B.Com. 30.9.94 8.6.97 [edo | 
9. | Mahadeo Yadav Saar Sa 8.6.97 Sudamdih 
20. | Bipin Kumar I.Com 8.2.93 8.6.97 Barora Area 
2l. | Agam Kr. Singh B.Com(Hons) 0.9.93 8.6.97 Sijua Area 
22. | Binod Kr. Pandey as = SE fee 8.6.97 RS Block-II Area 
23. | Ajit Kr. Manjhi HLS. 23,||.69 8.6.97 ede Toe. | 
24. | Nakul Mahato फल हो बन | 5] in 8.6.97 RS Block-IT Area 
25. | Aditya Kr. Pandey Madhyamik(WB) 8..87 8.6.97 dex — . —— | 
26. | Parma Nand Rai Matric 8.2.87 8.6.97 RS Block-II Area. 
27. | Pancham Kr. Gope_ | B.A. .| | .94 8.6.97 RS Katras 
28. | Kartik Prasad Matric 28.2.94 8.6.97 [oe | 


Mahato 


946 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : 0ए0)७छा' 5, 2026/ SHRAVAN 24, 948 


[PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


eee ieee. ieee जज Sierra) 29. Hemant Kr. BA(Hons) 4.7.95 3.2.98 Bhewra Area 
Choudhury 
30. | Amit Kr. Banerjee B.Sc. 20.5.95 3[.|2.98 CV Area 
3l. | Ambika Prasad B.Sc. 24.8.95 34.2.98 Kusunda Area. 
Singh 
32. | Ritesh Kumar LSc. 28..97 3[.|2.98 Ghanoodih Colly. 
33. | Gopal Krishna LSc. 29..94 3.2.98 Kusunda Area 
Pathak 
34. Kalol Chatterjee B.Sc.(Hon) 7.4.95 3.2.98 Mohuda Store 
35. | Jitendra Nath MA(LSW) 8..96 3.2.98 Lodna Area 
Sharma 
36. Sri Haripado B.Com 0..96 3.2.98 R.S. Lodna 
Rewani 
37. | Md. Aurangjee B.Com 5.5.95 3[.|2.98 PB. Area 
38. | Miss Uma Rani B.A 30.8.95 34.2.98 Bhowra Area 
Dutta 
39. | Sri Hari Bahadur M.Com 9.2.95 3[.|2.98 Sijua Area 
40. | Dhananjay Rai B.Com 22.3.95 3.2.98 Moonidih Area 
WJ 
4l. | Smt. Meeta Sahai M.A. 8.2.95 3[.|2.98 Sijua Area 
42. | Sri Rana Pratap B.Com. 8.0.94 3.2.98 Kusunda Area 
Mukherjee 
43. Surya Mohan Jha B.Com 25..96 34.2.98 RS Lodna 
44. | Azmat Alam LA. 24.5.95 3.2.98 Bastacolla Area. 
45. | Shanti Moy Das B.Sc. .2.95 3[.|2.98 C.V. Area 
46. | Bidya Nand Singh B.A.(Hons) 20.7.95 3.2.98 Moonidih WJA 
47. | Rama Nand Singh B.A. 2.6.95 3.2.98 WJ Area 
Moonidih 
48. | Sudhir Kr. Singh B.Sc. 4..93 3[.|2.98 CV Area 
49. Md. Jamal Uddin B.Com (Hons) 4..96 3.2.98 RS Bhowra 
Khan 
50. | Sri Chanchal Matric Dip in Com. 25.5.95 3.2.98 RS Lodna 
Chakraborty 
5l. | Pradip Kr. B.A 22.5.95 3.2.98 Bhowra Area 
Chattopadhyay 
52. | Ramashis Yadav M.A. 2.7.95 3.2.98 RS Block-II 
53. Santosh Kumar B.A. (Hons) 5.6.96 3.2.98 CV Area. 
54. | Smt. Sulekha B.A 3.5.94 3.2.98 RS Loyabad 
Sengupta 
55. | Sri Jaishankar B.Sc. .4.95 3.2.98 PB. Area 
Prasad 
56. | Amresh Mourya B.A. 9.5.95 3.2.98 WJ Area 
Moonidih 
57. Miss Manisha Barat | B.A. (Hons) 8.5.95 3.2.98 Kustore Area 
58. | Sri Anit Kr. Sinha B.Com. 7..90 29.6.2000 WJ Area 
Moonidih. 
59. | Indra Raj(SC) BA/B.Ed. 6.3.94 29.6.2000 Katras Area 
60. | B.C. Yadav BA/LLB .9.93 29.6.2000 do. = —— | 


2. On receiving order no. L-2002/4I/2009 -IR(CM-I) dated 29/05/2009 Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, Reference case no. 35 of 2009 was 
registered on 22.06.2009 and thereafter the notices were sent to the parties with a direction to appear 
and submit their written statements along with relevant documents and witnesses in support of their 


claims. 


3. After service of notice, both parties appeared previously and filed their authorities, W/S and 
subsequently rejoinder. It further appears that after 20.04.207 this case was put up after a long gap 
on 09.03.2026 and registered notices were issued to both the parties but workman/union failed to 
appear. However Sri N. Nath, O.S. Legal H.Q. for the management appeared and on 09.07.2026 he 
filed written notes of argument but workman/union remained absent in spite of regd. notice sent. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : अगस्त 5, 2026/ श्रावण 24, 948 947 


4. On perusal of the entire case record it transpires that workman/union never appeared before this 
Tribunal since 6..206 which shows that he has lost his interest in this case and therefore, for the 
ends of justice, this case deserves to be dismissed for non prosecution. 
5. Hence, 
ORDERED 
that this case is hereby dismissed for non prosecution and a “No Dispute Award” be drawn up 


in respect of the above reference case. Let the copies of Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, Government of India, New Delhi for information and notification. 


SACHINDRA KUMAR PANDEY, Presiding Officer 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 


and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054. 
KUMER _ 70७०७ 
y 


CHAND | CHANDMEENA 
Date: 2026.09.6 


MEENA. 09:5:2+05'30' 


