रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


AIX = राज्जपन्र 


Che Gazette of India 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-12042024-253660 
CG-DL-E-12042024-253660 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग प---खण्ड 3--उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 1574] नई दिल्ली, बुधवार, अप्रैल 10, 2024/45 21, 1946 
No. 1574] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, APRIL 10, 2024/CHAITRA 21, 1946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्ली, 10 अप्रैल, 2024 


का.आ. 1657(अ).--केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 1967 (1967 का 37) 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 
हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की तारीख 5 अक्तूबर, 2023 की अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 4348(अ) (जिसे इसमें 
इसके पश्चात Sed अधिसूचना कहा गया है) के द्वारा जम्मू एवं कश्मीर डेमोक्रेटिक फ्रीडम पार्टी (जेकेडीएफपी) को 
विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 5 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की तारीख 23 अक्तूबर, 2023 की अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 4639(अ) के द्वारा 
विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, 
जिसमें दिल्‍ली उच्च न्यायालय के न्यायाधीश माननीय न्यायमूर्ति श्री सचिन दत्ता थे; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
इस न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्या जम्मू एवं कश्मीर डेमोक्रेटिक फ्रीडम पार्टी (जेकेडीएफपी) को विधिविरुद्ध 
संगम के रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 3 नवंबर, 2023 को उक्त अधिकरण को उक्त 
अधिसूचना निर्दिष्ट की गई थी; 


और, Set अधिकरण ने, Set अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, 
उक्त अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 3 अप्रैल, 2024 को एक आदेश पारित किया था; 


2491 GI/2024 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


अतः, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार Sat अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, Te अधिकरण के आदेश 
को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:-- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 


न्यायमूर्ति सचिन दत्ता, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण” 


[फा.सं. 14017/30/2024-एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ.] 
अभिजीत सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 10th April, 2024 
S.O. 1657(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of 
section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) (herein after referred to as said Act), declared 
the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (JKDFP) as an unlawful association vide notification of the 


Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs number S.O. 4348 (E), dated the Sth October, 2023 (herein after 
referred to as said notification); 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 5 of 
the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) 
consisting of Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sachin Datta, Judge of the High Court of Delhi vide notification of the Government 
of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs number S.O. 4639 (E), dated the 23rd October, 2023; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 4 of 
the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 3rd November, 2023 for the purpose of adjudicating 
whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (JKDFP) 
as an unlawful association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of section 4 of the said 
Act, passed an order on 3rd April, 2024, confirming the declaration made in the said notification; 


Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby 
publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely :— 


“UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
NEW DELHI 

Date of Decision: 3rd April, 2024 
IN THE MATTER OF : 
Gazette Notification No. 8.0. 4348(E). dated 050 October, 2023 declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic 
Freedom Party (JKDFP) as unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 
AND IN THE MATTER OF : 
Reference under Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 made to this Tribunal by the Government 


of India through Ministry of Home Affairs vide Gazette Notification No. 8.00. 4639(E). dated 23rd October, 2023. 


Present: Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (ASG) along with Mr. Rajat Nair, Mr. Jay Prakash Singh, Ms. Priyanka 
Dalal, Mr. Annirudh Sharma, Mr. Dhruv Pande, Ms. Poornima Singh, Ms. Manisha Chava, 
Mr. Rustam Singh Chauhan, Mr. Abhijeet Singh and Mr. 0. P. Singh, Advocates for the Union of 
India. 


Mr. Parth Awasthi, Advocate for Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir. 


[भाग ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


Mr. Manoj Kumar Singh, Asstt. Director, Mr. Antariksh Singh Rathore, Asstt. Commandant and 
Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs. 


Mr. Himanshu Goel, Law Researcher. 


Mr. Sanjay Pokhriyal, Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 


CORAM: 
HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE SACHIN DATTA 
ORDER 
1. This order answers reference under Section 4(3) read with Section 3(3) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 


Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ or ‘UAPA’, for short) made to this Tribunal constituted vide Gazette 
Notification No. 5.0. 4639(E). dated 237 October, 2023 under Section 5(1) of the Act made by the Government of 
India, Ministry of Home Affairs, for adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and 
Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (‘JKDFP’ or ‘association’ in short) as an “unlawful association”. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 

2. The Central Government published Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) No. 5.0. 4348(E). dated 05" October, 
2023 in exercise of powers conferred under Section 3(1) of the Act and declared JKDFP to be an “unlawful 
association”. A copy of the said notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as contemplated under Rule 5(i) of the 


Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 (“UAP Rules” in short). The said notification dated 5" October, 2023 
reads as under :— 


“S.O. 4348(e)-Whereas, the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (hereinafter referred to as 
the JKDFP) was formed in 1998 by Shabir Ahmad Shah, a prominent separatist known for his anti-India and 
pro-Pakistan propaganda; 


And whereas, the founder of JKDFP had called Kashmir as a ‘dispute’ and ruled out any settlement 
within the framework of the Constitution of India; 


And Whereas, the members of the JKDFP have been at the forefront of secessionist activities in the 
Jammu and Kashmir and want to create a separate Islamic State; 


And Whereas, the leader or members of the JKDFP have been involved in raising funds through various 
sources including Pakistan and its proxy organizations for perpetrating unlawful activities, including 
supporting terrorist activities, sustained stone-pelting on Security Forces in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And Whereas the JKDFP and its members by their activities show sheer disrespect towards the 
constitutional authority and constitutional set up of the country; 


And Whereas, the JKDFP and its leaders or members, particularly its found Shabir Ahmad Shah, have 
been indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, security and communal 
harmony of the country; 


And Whereas, there have been a number of inputs showing linkages of the JKDFP with banned terrorist 
organizations; 


And Whereas, the JKDFP and its members have been involved in the violent terrorist activities with an 
intent to create a reign of terror in the country, thereby endangering the security and public order of the State, 
and its anti-national activities also show disrespect and disregard to the constitutional authority and 
sovereignty of the State, hence an immediate and prompt action is required against the organization; 


And Whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that if there is no immediate curb or control of 
unlawful activities of the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom party, it will use this opportunity to— 


(i) | Continue with the anti-national activities which are detrimental to the territorial integrity, security 
and sovereignty of the country; 


(ii) Continue advocating the secession of the Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India while 
disputing its accession to the Union of India; 


(iii) Escalate its insurrectionary activities including attempt to carve out an Islamic State out of the 
territory of the Union of India by destabilizing the Government established by law; and 


(iv) Continue propagating anti-national sentiments of the people of Jammu and Kashmir with the 
intention to cause disaffection against India and disrupt public order; 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


And Whereas, the Central government for the above-mentioned reasons is firmly of the opinion that 
having regard to the activities of the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Party, it is necessary to declare the 
Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (JKDFP) as an ‘unlawful association’ with immediate effect; 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government hereby declares the Jammu and 
Kashmir Democratic Freedom party (JKDFP) as an unlawful association; 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion that it is necessary 
to declare the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (JKDFP) as an unlawful association with 
immediate effect, and accordingly, in exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (3) of 
Section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby directs that this notification shall, subject to any 
order that may be made under Section 4 of the said Act, have effect for a period of five years from the date of 
its publication in the Official Gazette.” 


3 As can be seen, the notification also enumerates the reasons/ circumstances, as contemplated under proviso to 
Section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the association as unlawful, with immediate effect 


Il. THE BACKGROUND NOTE 
4. Along with the reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UAPA, the Central Government has submitted 
and filed before this Tribunal a background note, as contemplated under Rule 5(ii) of the UAP Rules, 1968. 


5. | The background note states that JKDFP was formed in the year 1998 with Shabir Ahmad Shah, a separatist 
leader, as its chairman. The association is known for its anti-India and pro-Pakistan propaganda, referring to Kashmir 
as a ‘dispute’, and ruling out any settlement within the framework of the Constitution of India. JKDFP has 
continuously advocated the secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India while disputing its accession to 
the Union of India; its members have shown sheer disrespect towards the constitutional authority and constitutional 
set-up of the country. The background note further states that since 1998, JKDFP has been organizing various 
processions in support of Kashmir’s ‘freedom struggle’, as also press-meetings in which Shabir Shah made stand of 
JKDFP clear on the ‘ongoing struggle’ in Kashmir, and blamed the Government of India for not acting sincerely 
towards the solution of Kashmir issue. Shabir Shah had given a boycott call of 1998 general elections. It is further 
stated that members of JKDFP have been at the forefront of secessionist activities in Jammu and Kashmir and want to 
create a separate Islamic State. Shabir Shah was reportedly taken into confidence by Pakistan Government through 
Pakistan based terrorist outfit ‘Muslim Janbaz Force’ (MJF) Chief and Vice Chairman of United Jehad Council, 
‘Mohammad Iqbal Kotwal’ @ Kaka Kotwal @ Usman and a sum of Rs. 1.2 crore is stated to have been given to him 
through different channels by the cross-border agency during 1999. 


Leadership 


6. As per the background note, in September 2020, there were 11 Executive Committee/EC members in JKDFP, 
including Shabir Shah, out of which two EC members namely Mehmood Ahmad Sagar (Acting Chairman, JKDFP) 
and Bashir Ahmad Shah @ Meeras (Spokesperson of JKDFP in Pakistan) are settled in Pakistan. It is stated that with 
Shabir Shah in Jail, many of the functionaries of JKDFP are lying low. Some of the important leaders, associated 
with JKDFP, are stated to be as under: 


a) Shabir Ahmad Shah (Chairman, currently in Tihar Jail) 

b) Mehmood Ahmad Sagar (Acting Chairman, PoK) 

c) Adv. Fayaz Ahmad Sodagar (General Secretary, r/o Anantnag) 

d) Younus Ahmad Tak (Chief Organizer, r/o Anantnag) 

e) |Manzoor Ahmad Yatoo (Member, Executive Council, r/o Anantnag) 

f) Masood Ahmad Bodha (Member, Executive Council, r/o Verinag, district Anantnag) 
g) | GhulamMohdMuqdam (Member, Executive Council, r/o Budgam) 

h) Mohd Ibrahim Bhat (Member, Executive Council, r/o Sopore, district Baramulla) 

i) Zameer Ahmad Sheikh (Member, Executive Council, r/o Nowgam, district Srinagar) 
jp Ghulam Rasool Nawaz (Member, Executive Council, r/o Pampore, district Pulwama) 
k) Ghulam Rasool Wani (Member, Executive Council, r/o Village Koil, district Pulwama) 
1) Bashir Ahmad Shah @ Meeras (Spokesperson, PoK) 

m) Bashir Azim (Spokesperson, r/o Pulwama) 

n) Bashir Ahmad Wani (District President, Kulgam, r/o Kulgam) 

०)  Tanvir Ahmad Bhat (District President, Shopian, r/o Shopian) 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


p) Mohammad Amin (District President, r/o Bonpora, Litter, district Pulwama) 
q) Abdul Rashid Gilkar (District President, r/o Sangri Colony, district Baramulla) 
r) Maulana Mohammad Abdullah Tari (retired General Secretary, r/o Alyalpora, district Shopian)” 


Activities Supporting Terrorists 


7. As per the background note, JKDFP had links with banned terrorist organizations and its leaders have been 
involved in raising funds through various sources including Pakistan and its proxy organizations for perpetrating 
unlawful activities, including supporting terrorist activities, sustained stone-pelting on Security Forces in Jammu and 
Kashmir. Shabir Ahmad Shah had criticized the retaliatory action by the Indian Army in Kargil and characterized it 
as complete violation of the ‘Lahore declaration’ by India. He was detained under Public Safety Act, 1978 on 
27.10.1999 and was released on 26.11.1999 from Central Jail, Jammu. In November 2006, Shabir Shah has said that 
India should positively respond to the proposals of United Jehad Council, a militant organization, for the resolution of 
Kashmir problem in the light of statements issued on behalf of Syed Salahuddin, head of United Jehad Council and 
Commanded-in-chief of Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (a banned terrorist organisation). He is stated to have created disruptive 
law and order situation in Jammu & Kashmir in July, 2016 by exhorting the masses over the killing of Burhan 
Muzaffar Wani, a commander of banned terrorist organization Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (‘HM’), and his two associates to 
participate in the funeral prayers in absentia for the martyrs. Eulogizing the terrorist, Shabir Shah said “Burhan Wani 
will always remain alive in our hearts. He is a role model for our youth. In his brief lifespan, he rendered immense 
contribution to the ongoing freedom struggle. He would be an inspiration for generations to come. People’s 
participation in funeral prayers of these martyrs is a referendum and an eye-opener for the world”. JKDFP is stated to 
have expressed deep concern over killing of LeT Commander Bashir Ahmad Wani and Shaheed Azad Ahmad, who 
were killed in encounter with SFs in Delgam, the JKDFP expressed in Srinagar on July 1, 2017 stating that there is a 
need to identify the black-sheep who were damaging the ‘freedom movement’. 


8. General Secretary, Moulana Abdullah Tari is also stated to have praised people of Pakistan for their moral, 
political, and diplomatic support. He urged the Government of Pakistan, its people, and all political parties to come 
on one platform and extend political support and exhibit solidarity with the ‘subjugated people’ of Jammu and 
Kashmir. On the death sentence awarded by the Kolkata court to Kashmiri terrorist Muzaffar Wani, he said “we 
cannot see our youth falling prey to judicial tyranny”. Terming the verdict as “politically motivated”, he said Indian 
judiciary at the behest of authorities is “murdering” the law and justice. Shabir Shah thus tried to cast aspersions on 
independence of judiciary and created distrust in the minds of Kashmiris to succeed in his evil designs. 


Anti-National Activities and Linkages with Cross Border Agency/Establishment 


9. The background note further states that Shabir Shah in a press release dated January 15, 2007 appealed to 
people to observe January 26, as ‘Black Day’. He stated that the dates January 26, August 15 and October 2 were 
painful for Kashmiris, because the people, who had snatched the freedom of Kashmiris, were celebrating these days. 
In August 2016, he rejected the Indian Prime Minister’s statement that Kashmir was an integral part of India terming 
August 15 as a ‘Day of Bloodbath’. 


10. To subvert democracy in Jammu and Kashmir, during 2002-2004, JKDFP, on the instructions of the cross 
border agency, persuaded the people to boycott the elections in Kashmir. In a move to bring unity among different 
secessionist outfits during 2003-2004, Shabir Shah was urged by cross border agency through Mehmood Sagar (PoK- 
based JKDFP leader) and Tajam-ul Islam (Chief, Kashmir Media Service) to join All Parties Hurriyat Conference/ 
‘APHC’ (Geelani faction). Shabir Shah had sent two ex-militants of terrorist outfit Muslim Janbaz Force (MJF), 
namely Zamir Ahmed Sheikh and Aijaz Gul Khan both residents of Srinagar to Pakistan on valid documents in the 
first week of December 2005, to revive the financial channel for the party. In the month of May 2006, Shabir Ahmad 
Shah continued to be an obedient mouthpiece of Pakistan establishment, urging India to resume dialogue with 
Pakistan, while advocating for involvement of militant leadership in the dialogue process. In June, 2015, he also 
welcomed the statement of the then Pakistan Army Chief General Raheel Sharif that Kashmir was an unfinished 
agenda of the partition of 1947, and added that General Sharif issued ‘exactly the right statement vis-a-vis Kashmir 
issue’. He also termed Pakistan’s role with regard to the Kashmir dispute as ‘crucial’. He said ‘the speeches of the 
Pakistan President in Parliament sent a clear message to India that resolving the Kashmir issue is a national 
responsibility of the Islamic Republic’. He expressed immense gratitude to every section of Pakistan particularly their 
top leadership and the military leadership for their unflinching support making the Kashmir issue echo at 
international forums. In April, 2016, in a statement issued to the press, he appealed to people to strengthen the 
Hurriyat Conference saying that only a strong platform could take the freedom movement to its logical end. 


Continued nexus between Shabir Shah and adverse elements across the border 


11. The background note further states that the APHC/PoK, under the leadership of Shabir Shah, has consistently 
issued statements challenging India's integrity and sovereignty, advocating for Kashmiri independence, and 
condemning what they perceive as Indian oppression. These statements have been disseminated through various 
channels, including social media and news portals. Some key instances include: 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


a) 


b) 


०) 


d) 


९) 


8) 


1) 


D 


k) 


On October 23, 2021, Shabir Shah reiterated calls for complete shutdown on October 27", the anniversary of 
India's 1947 ‘invasion and occupation of Kashmir’ against Kashmiris' wishes. He said that despite India's 
state terrorism, Kashmiris remain resolute in their freedom struggle which they are determined to take to its 
logical conclusion. He lauded Kashmiris’ unwavering morale and political stance of rejecting India's 
occupation. Shah said that the blood of ‘Kashmiri fighters’ nourishes the freedom struggle that Kashmiris 
must accomplish at all costs. 


On January 24, 2022, Shabir Shah reiterated calls to observe India's upcoming Republic Day on January 26 
as Black-Day in protest of India's illegal occupation of Kashmir. Shah appealed for civil curfew across 
occupied Kashmir. He said that Kashmiris have long rejected Indian rule through peaceful protests and 
demonstrations seeking self-determination. He condemned India's routine oppression and violence inflicted 
on Kashmiris. Shah asserted that forcibly waving the Indian flag cannot deter Kashmiris’ freedom 
sentiments. 


On February 15, 2022, APHC PoK chapter leader Mehmood Ahmad Sagar hailed Shabir Ahmad Shah for 
the resistance against alleged occupation of Jammu and Kashmir by India, in a statement issued in 
Islamabad. Sagar reiterated Shabir’s commitment to continue his mission in all circumstances and to raise 
his voice for the rights of Kashmiri people. 


On August 1, 2022, Shah called on the people of Kashmir to observe August 5th as Black Day, marking the 
anniversary of India's 2019 decision to revoke Jammu and Kashmir's special status. 


On March 12, 2022, Mehmood Sagar posted on social media stating ‘senior APHC leader and Chairman 
Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party/JKDFP, Shabir Ahmad Shah has condemned in strong 
terms the rising incidents of Indian state terrorism and the ongoing killing spree of Kashmiri youth by the 
Indian occupation forces in the territory. In a message from Tihar Jail, the leader while voicing his serious 
concern over the worsening human rights situation in the region said that the continued violence and 
bloodshed in the restive region poses a serious existential threat to Kashmiris who have been reeling under 
the India’s relentless and brutal suppression for the past several decades’. 


On May 30, 2022, Mehmood Ahmed Sagar yet again posted on social media that ‘In a message from Tihar 
jail, the leader Shabir Shah, while referring to rising incidents of violence in the valley said that on one hand 
Indian government has let loose its forces to kill innocent Kashmiris while on the other it has been 
shamelessly using anti-terror laws to silence legitimate political voices who have been advocating the 
Kashmiris’ just cause peacefully and seeking a settlement of the lingering dispute through dialogue and 
diplomacy’. 


On July 24, 2022, Mehmood Ahmed Sagar posted on social media that “senior APHC leader and chairman 
Jammu Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party Shabir Ahmad Shah has urged the world community, in 
particular the United Nations, to play its much-needed role to stop the bloodbath of innocent Kashmiris at 
the hands of the Indian forces in occupation of Kashmir. In a message from Tihar jail the JKDFP chief while 
highlighting the grim situation in the held territory said that there has been immense increase in the incidents 
of bloody violence unleashed upon Kashmiris by the Indian occupation troops’. 


On August 1, 2022, Mehmood Ahmed Sagar posted on social media that ‘senior APHC leader and Chairman 
Democratic Freedom Party Shabir Ahmad Shah has appealed to the people of Kashmir to observe 5th 
August as a black day to convey a strong message to the world that Kashmiris do not accept India’s 
hegemony and its illegal control over the territory of Jammu and Kashmir. In a message from Tihar Jail, the 
leader while terming 5th August 2019 as one of the worst precedents of Indian colonialism said ‘It was on 
this day when India stripped the region of its nationhood status, dissolved the state and reduced its status to a 
union territory’. 


On August 13, 2022, Mehmood Ahmed Sagar posted on social media that ‘Senior APHC leader and 
Chairman Democratic Freedom Party Shabir Ahmad Shah has appealed to the people of Kashmir to observe 
15 August as a black day to convey a strong message to the world that Kashmiris do not accept India’s 
hegemony and its illegal control over the territory of Jammu and Kashmir. In a message from Tihar Jail, the 
leader while terming India as usurper said that the country that has deprived millions of Kashmiris from their 
fundamental rights and snatched their fundamental freedoms by occupying their motherland has no 
justification, whatsoever, to observe Independence Day’. 


On February 9, 2023, Mehmood Ahmed Sagar posted on social media that ‘In a message from Tihar jail the 
APHC leader Shabir Shah said that the hanging of Afzal Guru was miscarriage of justice. The verdict 
against Guru was a slap on India's judiciary and its entire legal system that brazenly violated the 
fundamentals of justice by denying him the right to fair trial’. 


On June 15, 2023, All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) PoK chapter protested outside the Indian High 
Commission in Islamabad, condemning the extended detention of Shabir Ahmad Shah, activists, and 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण है 


Kashmiri youth in Jammu and Kashmir. The protesters highlighted the case of Shabir Ahmad Shah and 
appealed to international organizations to address the issue. They called for the release of detainees and 
accused India of using biased courts and agencies like the National Investigation Agency. 


Other inimical activities 


12. The background note further states that during Shabir Shah’s meeting on May 28, 2007 with Sheikh Ghulam 
Hassan (Amir-e-Jamaat, Jamaat-e-Islami, J&K- now proscribed), the latter while agreeing with Shabir’s suggestion 
for unity, endorsed Geelani’s position and advised Shabir to unite secessionists under the slogan of right of self- 
determination. Shabir also separately approached other APHC (Geelani faction) constituents and emphasized upon 
them the need for unity in the interest of freedom struggle. Shabir Ahmad Shah through a press release on August 17, 
2015 condemned the proposed creation of Sainik colonies and the settlement of retired Army personnel in Jammu & 
Kashmir and remarked that any such move to create Israel type colonies to change the demographic status of Jammu 
& Kashmir was unacceptable. Shabir Shah termed it a big diplomatic victory for Pakistan for garnering support of 
other nations to Kashmiris’ right to self-determination. In July, 2021, JKDFP made an appeal to the people of 
Kashmir to pay homage to the martyrs of 1931, to remember their sacrifices, observe complete shutdown on July 13, 
and renew their pledge to continue the ongoing ‘struggle for independence’. In May, 2021, General Secretary, 
JKDFP, Fayaz Soudagar stated that the day was not far off when Kashmiri masses in huge numbers would come out 
on roads against Government of India and UT Administration and neither force nor any strategy would be able to 
subdue their anger. It is stated that the said statement was not less than a clarion call against the Union of India and it 
was a clear attempt to excite disaffection towards the Government established by law. It is further stated that the chief 
organizer, JKDFP, Yunus Ahmad Tak made a visit to Saudi Arabia on June 16, 2021 to meet Pak based Hurriyat 
leaders. 


Cases being investigated by National Investigation Agency (NIA) relating to Jammu and Kashmir Democratic 


Freedom Party (JKDFP) 


13. The background note mentions that a NIA case RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI under sections 120B, 121 & 121A of 
IPC and sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the UAPA, 1967 was registered at PS NIA New Delhi, based on 
credible information that Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, Amir of Jamat-ud-Dawah and the secessionist and separatist 
leaders, including the members/cadres of the Hurriyat Conference, have been acting in connivance with active 
militants of proscribed terrorist organizations viz. Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba 
(LeT), and other terrorist organizations/associations/gangs for raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically 
and abroad through various illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in Jammu 
and Kashmir. Investigation revealed that various terrorist organizations viz. JKLF, HM, LeT, in connivance with 
various secessionist groups particularly the APHC/Hurriyat Conference and its constituents funded by Pakistan and 
its agencies and terror groups have entered into a criminal conspiracy to wage war against the Government of India. 
The Hurriyat leaders and their supporters are following the ideology of ‘freedom’ i.e. secession of the State of Jammu 
& Kashmir from the Union of India. Shabir Ahmad Shah, JKDFP was involved in the conspiracy of insurgency and 
funding for unrest in Jammu & Kashmir and also inciting people to hold protests, hartals and complete shut-downs. 
He was involved in raising funds through donations from Kashmiris and also received funds from Pakistan. These 
funds were used for unlawful activities such as stone pelting on security forces and creating unrest in Jammu & 
Kashmir. A lot of incriminating materials were recovered from his residential premises. Shabir Ahmad Shah was 
arrested on 04.06.2019 and based on the evidence that came on record, 2nd Supplementary Charge-Sheet in the said 
NIA case was filed on 04.10.2019 against five accused persons including Shabir Ahmad Shah u/s 120B, 121, 121A & 
124A IPC and section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of UAPA, in the NIA Special Court, Patiala House Courts, New 
Delhi. Charges were framed against accused Shabir Ahmad Shah on 16.03.2022 for the offences under sections 
120B, 121, 121A of IPC and Section 13 UAPA r/w 120B IPC, Section 15 UAPA r/w 1208 IPC, Sections 17, 18 & 20 
of UAPA. The said case is under trial. 


Case Being Investigated by Delhi Police (Special Cell) Relating to Shabir Shah. 


14. The background note states that on 26.08.2005, Delhi Police Special Cell had arrested one accused Mohd. 
Aslam Wani and recovered 5 Kg of explosive, one pistol with 15 live cartridges and a cash of Rupees 62,96,000/-. 
During investigation, the accused Mohd. Aslam Wani made a disclosure statement before Delhi Police that he had 
been acting as a carrier for Shabir Shah for the last 15 months for collecting hawala amount from hawala operator in 
Delhi and used to deliver the same to Shabir Shah at Srinagar. On the instructions of Shabir Shah, Mohd Aslam Wani 
collected the hawala payment to the tune of Rs.62,96,000/- from a hawala operator through one Iqbal of Bombay on 
25.8.2005 and out of the said amount he was to deliver Rs. 52,96,000 to Shabir Shah and the remaining amount of Rs. 
10,00,000/- was to be paid for the activists of Jaish-e-Mohammed, a banned terrorist organization. Upon this 
revelation, FIR No. 122/05 dated 26.08.2005 was registered by P.S Special Cell Delhi Police against Shabir Shah. 


Case Being Investigated _by Enforcement Directorate (ED) Relating To Jammu and Kashmir Democratic 


Freedom Party (JKDFP). 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


15. The background note gives the details of the case being investigated by the Enforcement Directorate. It states 
that ECIR No. ECIR/04/DZ/2007 dated 09.02.2007 was registered by the ED on the strength of FIR No.- 122/2005 
dated 26.08.2005 U/s 120B/121/121A/122/123 IPC, U/s 4 & 5 of Explosive Substance Act, U/s 17 & 23 of UAPA & 
U/s 25 of Arms Act. It further states that during PMLA Investigation Shabir Ahmad Shah was arrested on 26.07.2017 
from Srinagar and was produced before the Court on the same day. Shabir Ahmad Shah continues to be in judicial 
custody as on date. It is stated that Mohd. Aslam Wani was arrested on 06.08.2017 and was produced before the 
Court on the same day and was first remanded to ED Custody and later to judicial custody. He was released on bail 
vide Order dated 18.01.2019 passed by High Court of Delhi. The Enforcement Directorate is investigating a case 
against Hafiz Saeed and others under the provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 in which one 
of the accused is Shabir Ahmad Shah, Head of JKDFP. Investigation revealed that Shabir Ahmad Shah, along with 
other accused persons, played a key role in building the separatist/militant movement in Jammu and Kashmir. 
Investigation by NIA revealed that accused Shabir Shah was continuously in touch with these Pakistan-based 
militants and had received funds to the tune of Rs.1,20,00,000/- through hawala and other means from these persons. 
As on date, proceeds of crime amounting to Rs. 21,80,000/- in the form of immovable property belonging to Shabir 
Ahmad Shah has been attached by Enforcement Directorate vide Provisional Attachment Order (PAO) dated 
03.11.2022 under the provisions of PMLA which has been confirmed by learned Adjudicating Authority. Shabir 
Ahmad Shah has been made an accused in the supplementary Prosecution Complaint filed on 09.01.2023 before 
PMLA Special Court in the case. 


Cases being investigated by Jammu and Kashmir Police 


16. The background note mentions that in addition to the cases registered by NIA, Delhi Police and ED, the State 
Police of J&K have also registered many cases against Shabir Shah under various sections of UAPA, RPC Act 1932, 
TADA (P) Act, in which he has been accused of perpetrating unlawful activities against the integrity and sovereignty 
of the country, raising anti national slogans, delivering hate speeches, propagating secessionism, disturbing 
communal harmony, provoking people to fight against security forces, appreciating terrorist acts and promoting 
enmity between different groups on the grounds of separatism, which are prejudicial to the national integration and 
sovereignty of the Union of India. Its linkages with Pak-ISI and support to terrorist activities are also a cause of 
concern. 


17. The background note states that JKDFP and its leaders or members, particularly its founder Shabir Ahmad 
Shah, have been indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, security and 
communal harmony of the country. Keeping in view the activities of JKDFP, the Central Government has prescribed 
it as an unlawful association vide Gazette Notification (Extraordinary) S.O. 4348(E). dated 5" October, 2023. 


18. Along with the background note, following Annexure-1 is appended, thereby giving the details of the cases 
registered by Jammu and Kashmir Police against the JKDFP members:- 


Details of The Cases Registered By Jammu And Kashmir Police (JKP) Against The Jammu And Kashmir 


Democratic Freedom Party (JKDFP) Members 


S. Case FIR No. Name of the Separatist | Brief of the case Status of 
No /Party affiliation investigation 
1. 17/2014 U/S 13 UA(P) Act, | Shabir Ahmad Shah S/O Late | Through reliable sources on 07- | Challaned 
132-A PR Act P/S Hajin Ghulam Mohammad Shah | 03-2014 P/S Hajin received an 
R/O KadiporaAnantnag A/P | information that Shabir Ahmad 
Sanat Nagar Srinagar Shah along with other associates 


Nayeem Khan, Bashir Dra and 
MohdYousufNaqash delivered 
anti national speech against the 
integrity/ Sovereignty of the 
country at Bazar Hajin. He also 
provoked the people for election 
boycott and also warmed people of 
dire consequences if they 
participated in the elections. They 
also chanted pro-Pak slogans. 


2. 39/2015 u/s 147, 148, 336, The case pertains to anti national | Challaned 
341, 13 UA(P) Act P/S speech delivered by Shabir 
Magam Ahmad Shah chairman of J&K 


Peoples Democratic Freedom 
party, Zaffer AkberBhat रण 
Salvation Movement, Nayeem 
Ahmad Khan,  AsiyaAndrabi 
Chairperson DukhtaranMillat at 
Narbal on 21/04/2015 while 
visiting the residence of deceased 


[भाग [avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


namely Suhail Ahmad Sofi S/o 
Abdul Ahad Sofi R/O Narbal for 
condolence purposes. They raised 
slogans in favour of Pakistan and 
against India and also provoked 
the people against the country. 
They also halted the smooth flow 
of traffic on Tangmag-Srinagar 
Road. 


44/2015 u/s 13 UA(P) Act, 
147,124A-RPC P/S 
Kralgund 


On 22-05-2015 P/S  Kralgund 
received a reliable information 
that Shabir Ahmad shah visited 
village Ashpora along with his 
associates and called a meeting of 
public and raised anti national 
slogans etc. They also raised 
Pakistani flag and chanted anti- 
India slogans besides provoked 
the youth against the country and 
appealed them to fight for the 
freedom of Kashmir from India. 


Challaned 


52/2015 U/S 13 UA(P) Act 
P/S Sumbal 


On = 27-03-2015 Anti-national 
activists including Shabir Ahmad 
Shah delivered anti national 
speech against the integrity / 
Sovereignty of the country and 
raised “Pakistan Zindabad slogans 
etc. at Naidkhai, Sumbal. 


Challaned 


132/11 U/S 147,336 RPC of 
P/S Chrari-Shrief 


Brief facts of the case are that 
some ANE’s headed by Shabir 
Ahmad Shah pelted stones on the 
deployed Police Party at 
Pakherpora, Budgam and tried to 
disrupt the peace and tranquillity 
of the area besides chanted anti- 
national slogans and halted the 
traffic. 


Challaned 


86/2004 u/s 132, 132B RP 
Act P/S Kupwara 


On 16-04-2004 after conclusion 
of Friday prayers a mob came out 
from Jamia Masjid Kupwara 
headed by Shabir Ahmad Shah 
and others raising antinational 
slogans regarding election 
boycott. 


Challaned 


59/2010 u/s 153, 121- RPC 
Maisuma, Srinagar 


On 29.07.2010, during the Press 
conference Shabir Ahmad Shah 
emphasized the fact that the 
killing of the Kashmiri Youth is 
highly condemnable and AFSPA 
is a type of shield in the hands of 
security forces to kill the common 
people. 


Challaned 


61/2017 U/S 132(B)RP Act 
PS Parimpora, Srinagar 


On 28-03-2017, during checking 
02 persons were found pasting 
posters regarding election boycott 
call given by Separatist leader 
Shabir Ahmad Shah etc. 


Challaned 


108/2009 U/S = 153-A,13 
UA(P) Act PS Batmaloo, 
Srinagar 


P/S received an information on 
15/11/2009 from the reliable 
sources to the effect that Shabir 
Ahmad Shah, along with other 
activists are deliberately 
misguiding the general public and 
provoke them to join the Hurriyat 
and make themselves  Anti- 
national etc. 


Challaned 


10 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


10. 


73/1999 
188,332,424,147,336,149 
RPC PS RajbaghSrinagar 


On 13.08.1999 | Democratic 
freedom Party leader along with 
other associates were raising 
slogans against the State and 
instigating the public not to 
participate in Independence Day 
function. On Seeing the police 
party attacked the police party and 
stopped them to perform govt. 
duty and injured, tom their 
uniforms they also violate the 
orders U/S 144 CrPC which 
already implemented in district 
Srinagar by the District 
Magistrate Srinagar. 


Challaned 


11. 


155/95 U/S 188,148,353,121 
RPC PS sadder Srinagar 


Brief facts of case are that on 
09.05.1995 Separatists activists 
Shabir Ahmad Shah and Ab Gani 
Lone along with other associates 
Started procession/Marching 
towards Charari-Sharief. 


Challaned 


12. 


26/2016 U/S — 120-b,121- 
a, 153-A,506 RPC, 13,18 
UA(P) Act 7?8 Sadder 
Srinagar 


On 22.02.2016 Shabir Ahmad 
Shah in presence of other leaders 
addressed press conference that 
due to JNU incident student and 
businessmen Kashmir Valley are 
facing harassment by police and 
other state agencies in Delhi and 
has given threat of काट 
consequences besides warned the 
govt of India about any harm 
caused to SAR Geelani. 


Challaned 


13. 


122/2014 U/S 13 UA(P) 
Act P/S Shopian 


Shabir Shah and other Leaders on 
AsiyaNelofer anniversary, give 
hateful speeches and _ slogans 
against the unity and integrity of 
national. 


Challaned 


14. 


173/2012 U/S, 148, 149, 
336, 427, 341 RPC P/S 
Shopian 


Pertains to stone pelting on 
security forces by the people after 
been instigated by some activists. 


Challaned 


15. 


16/2010 U/S 153-A, RPC of 
PS Rajpora 


On 29.01.2010 during his visit at 
Qalampora where some terrorists 
were neutralized by SFs, Shabir 
Shah gave provocative speech 
instigating the people for anti- 
national activities. 


Challaned 


16. 


86/2014 U/S 505 (2) (1) 
RPC, 132 R-Act of PS 
Pulwama 


During patrolling on 14-04-2019 
election boycott posters surfaced 
at village Hakripora etc which 
were found pasted by some 
activists. 


Challaned 


17. 


288/2015 U/S148,149,336, 
427, 332,307-RPC 13 ULA 
of PS Pulwama 


On 11.09.2015 ShabirAhamd 
Shah organized Cow Slaughter 
followed by Stone pelting case at 
Rajpora. Chowk as _— such 
instigating / provoking the people 
against the decision some state 
govt. on cow slaughter. 


Challaned 


18. 


114/2014 U/S 13 UA(P) Act 
of P/S Budgam. 


The brief facts of the case are that 
13/06/2014 PS Budgam received 
reliable information to the effect 
that at Nasrullahpora chowk, 
Shabir Ahmad Shah boarding in a 
Vehicle (Tata Sumo) is delivering 
his speech against the security of 
nation and provoking general 


Challaned 


[भाग avs 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


11 


masses against the sovereignty of 
India, due to which the smooth 
running of traffic has been 
interrupted etc. 


19. 


118/2008 U/S 148, 149, 452, 
436 RPC P/S Baramulla 


While returning from 
MuzaffarabadChalo, a huge mob 
set ablaze a motor Garage of one 
belonging to Irshad Ahmad Khan 
S/o Lt. Abdul Rashid Khan R/o 
Delina 


Challaned 


20. 


97/2010 u/s 153A-RPC P/S 
Anantnag 


Shabir Shah and others, after 
attending Friday prayers while 
speaking on the occasion 
provoked the people for anti- 
national activities. They also 
raised anti-India slogans and 
Pakistan Zindabad slogans. 


Challaned 


21. 


05/2011 u/s 13(1) 8 UA(P) 
Act P.S Anantnag 


Case pertains to publishing a 
calendar by APHC in which 
contents unfavorable to country’s 
brotherhood has been published 
as such causing damage / dis- 
affection among the people of 
Indian union. 


Challaned 


22. 


68/2008 US 
147,332,336,427 RPC PS 
Nigeen, Srinagar 


On 04.07.2008 an unruly mob 
headed by Shabir Ahmad Shah, 
Mohammad Ashraf @ Sehraie, 
Hakeem Ab Rasheed after Friday 
prayers pelted stones on deployed 
forces at Tel Bal Adda with the 
intention to damage Govt/ Public 
property and raised anti national 
slogans against Sovereignty of 
India. they also damaged some 
vehicles and _ pedestrians by 
pelting stones. 


Under 
Investigation 


23. 


10/2014 u/s 13 UA(P) Act 
Kothi Bagh, Srinagar. 


On 6/02/2014 Hurriyat 
Conference J&K organized a 
Seminar at Hotel Lala Rukh in 
which Shabir Ahmad Shah DFP 
Chairman had __sparticipated. 
During their speech they 
provoked the people to raise anti 
national slogans etc. They 
provoked the people against the 
integrity and sovereignty of the 
country. India has not only killed 
MagqboolBhat and AfzalGuroo but 
their dead bodies also have not 
been handed over to their legal 
heirs. 


Under 
Investigation 


24. 


108/2004 U/S 353,336,427 
RPC P/S Batmaloo, Srinagar 


Case stands registered against 
Yaseen Malik and others who 
have protested against the 
Assembly election 2004. 


Under 
Investigation 


25. 


11/2011 U/S_ 147,332,296 
RPC P/S Nigeen Srinagar 


On 18/02/2011 some activists on 
the eve of Eid Milad Nabi 
assembled at VIP park Hazratbal 
headed by Shabir shah and others 
and protested there which created 
panic among the people who had 
come there for Friday prayers. 
They also pelted stones on police 
party deputed there by which 
some police / civilians got 
injured. 


Under 
Investigation 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


26. 


157/09 U/S 120B, 120, 121, 
153-A RPC 13-ULA 
ShahedGunj Srinagar 


On the eve of death anniversary 
of Late Ali Mohd Jinnah, Shabir 
Ahmad Shah, Feroz Ahmad 
Khan, Asia Andrabi, 
MianQayoom and SAS Geelani 
delivered Anti- National speech in 
Hotel Jehangir. They castigated 
the Indian Govt. and challenged 
the Security and sovereignty of 
the country by delivering a speech 
that “Kashmir wants Azadi for 
Islam” and India is killing our 
people and it cannot be our friend. 


Under 
Investigation 


27. 


142/2001 U/S 147,148,153- 
A,336, 353 RPC of PS 
Pulwama 


On 18.05.2001 after Friday 
prayers at Jamia Masjid Pulwama, 
Shabir Ahmad Shah and_ his 
associates including Gh. Nabi 
Shaheen, Zahoor Ahmed Kuttay 
chanted anti-India slogans and 
tried to proceed towards main 
Bazar Pulwama and pelted stone 
upon Police. 


Under 
Investigation 


28. 


10/2010 u/s 13,17,18 UA(P) 
Act, 120B, 121A RPC P/S 
CIK 


P/S CI Kashmir Humhama during 
the investigation of case FIR 
No.15/91 it came to light through 
reliable sources that secessionist 
leaders namely Shabir Ahmad 
Shah, Nayeem Khan and others 
have amassed huge wealth and 
raised huge assets through various 
hawala channels. The unlawful 
association / individuals and the 
so-called political leaders 
favouring secessionism of J&K 
from the union of India through 
armed violence / secessionist 
ideology are utilizing _ this 
property to facilitate illegal 
funding to various terrorist outfits 
for carrying forward terrorist 
violence secessionism in the state 
of J&K against union of India. 


Under 
Investigation 


29. 


205/2008 ws 
147,148,149,188,332,336,12 
1-B,427, 153-A RPC P/S 
Sopore 


An unruly mob led by Shabir 
Ahmad Shah pelted stones upon 
police/SF during Muzaffar Abad 
Chaloocall on 11-08-2008. They 
provoked the general masses to 
raise anti-India slogans during the 
rally. The youth were carrying 
lathis, stones and other 
destructive things and attacked 
the vehicles of Police officers in 
which vehicle of ASP and DYSP 
Sopore and also injured some 
police officials. 


Under 
Investigation 


30. 


31. 


110/2014 U/S 147, 341-RPC 
13 UA) Act of P/S 
Budgam. 


310/2011 u/s 153A-RPC P/S 


On 11/06/2014 Shabir Ahmad 
Shah & others violated D.M 
Srinagar order and assembled/ 
gathered at Hyderpora chowk to 
pay tributes to the so-called 
martyrs. They also raised slogans 
against integrity of India and 
restrained police nafri from 
performing their legal duties. 
They also halted the smooth flow 
of traffic 


After Namaz-e-Zuhr, SAS 


Under 
Investigation 


Under 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


13 


Anantnag 


Geelani and Shabir Shah while 
speaking on the occasion at Rishi 
Bazar provoked the youth to join 
the ongoing battle for self- 
determination. While speaking on 
the occasion they told people that 
India is trying to create rift 
between different communities in 
Kashmir so that they can stop 
seeking freedom from India. They 
also raised anti-India and Pro-Pak 
slogans on the occasion. 


Investigation 


32. 


111/2004 U/S 13 UA(P) Act, 
132-B, RPC P/S Baramulla 


This case stands registered against 
Shabir Ahmad Shah for 
displaying election _ boycott 
posters का district Baramulla 
wherein he has told the people 
that we are at a stage where either 
we have to accept the slavery of 
India or prefer to fight against 
India for the freedom of J&K. 


Under 
Investigation 


33. 


116/2008 U/S 
148,149,121,307,452,436,51 
1,332,435,427 RPC P/S 
Baramulla 


The case stands registered against 
some persons including Shabir 
Ahmad Shah who pelted stones 
thereby created law and order 
problem at Mohalla Jadeed 
Baramulla and set ablaze SRTC 
Bus and damaged CRPF Bunker. 


Under 
Investigation 


34. 


157/2011 U/S 13(2) UA(P) 
Act P/S Bijbehara 


The instant case stands registered 
on reliable information received 
by the Police Station Bijbehara 
with regard to gathering of a mob 
and instigating them 09 
separatists namely ShabirAhamd 
Shah, Abdul Hamid Dar, Shawkat 
Ahmed Rather and others against 
Union of India besides shouting 
anti-national slogans at village 
Kanelwan,  Bijbehara. They 
provoked the people for 
separation of J&K from the Union 
of India and thus created enmity 
towards the country. 


Under 
Investigation 


35. 


198/2004 U/S 132 8 1२.0 
Peoples Act P/S Anantnag 


Case pertains to provocation of 
people by Shabir Shah, Aziz 
Sheikh, etc for election boycott at 
LalchowkAnantnag. 


Under 
Investigation 


36. 


197/12 U/S, 147, 148, 149, 
152, 336, RPC 13(1) UA(P) 
Act P/S Anantnag 


On the death anniversary of Dr 
Qazi Nisar a mob from different 
areas of town Anantnag raised 
anti national slogans and started 
heavy stone pelting on SFs / 
Police resulting in several injuries 
and damage of property. 


Under 
Investigation 


37. 


77/2014 U/S 153,153A, 120- 
A, 121 RPC of P/S Kangan 


The case stands registered against 
Shabir Ahmad Shah regarding 
provocative speech delivered by 
him in Jamia Masjid Kangan after 
Friday prayers thereby causing 
threat to integrity / sovereignty of 
state. He provoked the people for 
election boycott and created 
hatred among the masses. 


Under 
Investigation 


Ii. 


19. 


STATUTORY PROVISIONS 


Section 2 (0) and (p) of the UAPA, read as follows:- 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 


(0) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by such individual 
or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by 
visible representation or otherwise), - 


(i) | Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of 
a part of the territory of India or, the secession of a part of the territory of India from the Union, or 
which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial 
integrity of India; or 


(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 
(p) “unlawful association” means any association, - 


(i) _ which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any 
unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake such activity; or 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153-A or Section 153-B of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or which encourages or aids persons to undertake any such 
activity, or of which the members undertake any such activity: 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply to the State of Jammu and Kashmir”. 


20. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action taken” by an association or an 
individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of the said sub-section. Any action taken has reference to 
and must be of the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (i), (ii) or (iii). Action can be either written or spoken, by 
sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. Clause (i) refers to “action taken” with the intent or which 
supports any claim for secession or cession of any part of India or incites any individual or group of individuals to 
bring about secession or cession. Clause (1) refers to “action taken” which has the effect of disclaiming, questioning, 
disrupting or intending to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” 
which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


21. Unlawful association has been defined in Section 2(p) of the Act and consists of two parts; (1) and (ii). Part (i) 
refers to unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) and encompasses associations which have the object that encourage 
or even aide persons to undertake the said activity. The last part of Part (i) widens the definition of the term “unlawful 
association” to include an association of which members undertake unlawful activity. In a way, therefore, the 
association is vicariously liable and can be regarded as an unlawful association if members of an association undertake 
unlawful activity. 


22. Section 2(p)(ii) does not refer to unlawful activities defined in Section 2(0) of the Act, but refers to Sections 
153A and 153B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC for short). An association which encourages or aides or the 
object of which is to encourage or aide persons to undertake activities punishable under Section 153A or 153B is an 
unlawful association. “Object” for which an association is formed can in many cases be in writing but encouragement 
and aide to persons to undertake activities under Sections 153A and 153B may be oral or in writing. The last part of 
Section 2(p)(ii) widens and expands the scope of the term “unlawful association”, when it stipulates that an 
association of which members undertake activities which are punishable under Section 153A or 153B of the IPC is an 
unlawful association. An association, therefore, can become an unlawful association if its members undertake any 
activity covered by Section 153A or 153B of the IPC. 


IV. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE PRESENT TRIBUNAL 


23. The nature of the proceedings before this Tribunal and the scope of inquiry in the present proceedings have been 
laid down by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 428 in the specific 
context of the provisions of the UAPA, 1967. The proceedings before this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard 
of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). This lis has to be decided 
by objectively examining which version is more acceptable and credible. In this regard, reference may be made to 
following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra): 


“30. The allegations made by the Central Government against the Association - Jamaat-E-Islami Hind - were 
totally denied. It was, therefore, necessary that the Tribunal should have adjudicated the controversy in the 
manner indicated. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned counsel for the Association, Jamaat-E-Islami Hind, contended 
that apart from the allegations made being not proved, in law such acts even if proved, do not constitute 
“unlawful activity" within the meaning of that expression defined in the Act. In the present case, the alternative 
submission of Shri Sorabiee does not arise for consideration on the view we are taking on his first submission. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 15 


The only material produced by the Central Government to support the notification issued by it under Section 
3(1) of the Act, apart from a resume based on certain intelligence reports, are the statements of Shri T.N. 
Srivastava, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs and Shri N.C. Padhi, Joint Director, IB. Neither Shri 
Srivastava nor Shri Padhi has deposed to any fact on the basis of personal knowledge. Their entire version is 
based on official record. The resume is based on intelligence reports submitted by persons whose names have 
not been disclosed on the ground of confidentiality. In other words, no person has deposed from personal 
knowledge whose veracity could be tested by cross-examination. Assuming that it was not in public interest to 
disclose the identity of those persons or to produce them for cross-examination by the other side, some method 
should have been adopted by the Tribunal to test the credibility of their version. The Tribunal did not require 
production of those persons before it, even in camera, to question them and test the credibility of their version. 
On the other hand, the persons to whom the alleged unlawful acts of the Association are attributed filed their 
affidavits denying the allegations and also deposed as witnesses to rebut these allegations. In such a situation, 
the Tribunal had no means by which it could decide objectively, which of the two conflicting versions to accept 
as credible. There was thus no objective determination of the factual basis for the notification to amount to 
adjudication by the Tribunal, contemplated by the statute. The Tribunal has merely proceeded to accept the 
version of the Central Government without taking care to know even itself the source from which it came or to 
assess credibility of the version sufficient to inspire confidence justifying its acceptance in preference to the 
sworn denial of the witnesses examined by the other side. Obviously, the Tribunal did not properly appreciate 
and fully comprehend its role in the scheme of the statute and the nature of adjudication required to be made by 
it. The order of the Tribunal cannot, therefore, be sustained." 


24. The present Tribunal, constituted under the UAPA, has been vested with certain powers and the procedure to be 
adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act, which are reproduced as under: 


55. Tribunal. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, as and when 
necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal" consisting of one person, 
to be appointed by the Central Government: Provided that no person shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge 
of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the presiding officer of 
the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of 
this section to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at 
which the vacancy is filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be necessary for the 
discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of 
India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own procedure in all 
matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place or places at which it will hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same powers as are vested 
in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the 
following matters, namely: - 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath; 

(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as evidence; 
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 

(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or office ; 


(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court 
for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).”’ 


“9. Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any rules that may be 
made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding any inquiry under sub-section (3) 
of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of section 7 
or sub-section (8) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the investigation of claims and the decision of the Tribunal or the Court of the 
District Judge, as the case may be, shall be final.” 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


25. Further, under Section 4(1) of Act, the Central Government refers the notification (issued under Section 3(1) of 
the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for declaring the association 
unlawful. Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice on the association affected to show cause why the association 
should not be declared as unlawful. Section 4(3) mandates an inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 after calling 
for such information as may be necessary from Central Government or from office bearers or members of the 
association. The Tribunal under Section 4(3) is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either 
confirming the declaration made in the notification or cancelling the same. After interpreting the said provisions of the 
UAPA in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), it was held by the Supreme Court as under:- 


“11.... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of material placed 
before the Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of adjudication of a lis between two 
parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the material produced by them. Credibility of the 
material should, ordinarily, be capable of objective assessment. The decision to be made by the Tribunal is 
“whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the Association unlawful”. Such a determination 
requires the Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material to support the declaration outweighs the 
material against it and the additional weight to support the declaration is sufficient to sustain it. The test of 
greater probability appears to be the pragmatic test applicable in the context.” 


26. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the Supreme Court emphasized that 
the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing credibility of the information and the Tribunal should 
satisfy itself whether it can safely rely upon it. This was necessary as in certain situations, source of information or 
disclosure of full particulars may be against public interest. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality 
of information and its source in public interest, enables the Tribunal to test the credibility of confidential information 
for objectively deciding the reference. It was emphasized that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often 
be clandestine in nature and, therefore, material or information for various reasons may require confidentiality. 
Disclosure, it was held, can jeopardize criminal cases pending investigation and trial. 


27. On the question of nature and type of evidence, which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the Supreme Court 
referred to Rule 3 of UAP Rules, 1968. Rule 3(1) stipulates that the Tribunal subject to sub-rule (2) shall follow, “as 
far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian Evidence Act. In this regard, reference can be made to 
the following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra):- 


“22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure would 
ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in controversy after assessing the 
credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse 
dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice 
tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, 
without jeopardizing the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication is not denuded 
of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by it on all points in controversy 
after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer [408 US 471: 33 L Ed 2d 464 (1972)] the 
United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be 
followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) written notice 
of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence against him; (c) opportunity 
to be heard in person and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and 
cross-examine adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing 
confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the factfinders as to the 
evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no thought to equate this 
second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the 
process should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material 
that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial.” 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. ......The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence of sufficient 
cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of 
natural justice to ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available 
material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial 
scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in 
a given case, would depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the 
manner in which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in 
view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in such 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 17 


matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The 
Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of the 
material relating to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so requires.” 


28. Before assessing the credibility of material and analyzing evidence adduced, it is apposite to take note of 
Sections 25, 26 and 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, as well as Sections 161 and 162 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973. The same are reproduced hereunder: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.—No confession made to a police-officer , shall be proved as 
against a person accused of any offence. 


26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.—No confession made by 
any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made in the immediate presence of a 
Magistrate4 , shall be proved as against such person. 


Explanation.—In this section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a village discharging magisterial 
functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George 6 *** or elsewhere, unless such headman is a Magistrate 
exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 18827 (10 of 1882). 


27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.—Provided that, when any fact is deposed 
to as discovered inconsequence of information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of 
a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to 
the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 


Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 


“161. Examination of witnesses by police.—(1) Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter, 
or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general or special order, prescribe 
in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine orally any person supposed to be 
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. 


(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such officer, 
other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him to a criminal charge or to a 
penalty or forfeiture. 


(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an examination under 
this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record of the statement of each such person 
whose statement he records. 


Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio-video electronic means: 


Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 354, section 354A, 
section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 3 section 376A, section 376AB, section 376B, section 
376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB], section 376E or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or attempted shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any 
woman officer. 


162. Statements to police not to be signed:Use of statements in evidence.—(1) No statement made by any 
person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be 
signed by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary or 
otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any 
inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose statement has been 
reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and 
with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by 
section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any 
part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any 
matter referred to in his crossexamination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of clause (1) 
of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the provisions of section 27 of that Act. 


Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to in sub-section (1) may 
amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and otherwise relevant having regard to the 
context in which such omission occurs and whether any omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular 
context shall be a question of fact.” 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


29. As per Section 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, confessions made to a police officer or while in custody shall not 
be proved against a person accused of any offense during the trial of that offense. As per Section 162 of the Cr.P.C., 
no statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII (which 
includes Section 161 Cr.P.C.) can be used, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the 
time when such statement was made. However, these sections do not prohibit the use of such statements in 
proceedings where the accused is not being tried for the specific offense in question, or in civil proceedings or 
ancillary proceedings. 


30. The Supreme Court in Mahesh Kumar v. State of Rajasthan, 1990 Supp SCC 541 (2), noted the possible use of 
statement made to the police by the accused persons for being use of as evidence against the accused in an “enquiry” 
although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged. Relevant 
extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. In Queen Empress v. TribhovanManekchand a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court laid down that the 
statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of property which was the subject 
matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the 
offence with which they were charged, were admissible as evidence with regard to the ownership of the property 
in an enquiry held by the Criminal Procedure Code. The same view was reiterated in Pohlu v. Emperor where it 
was pointed out that though there is a bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, or in Section 162 CrPC for being 
made use of as evidence against the accused, this statement could be made use of in an enquiry under Section 
517 CrPC when determining the question of return of property. These two decisions have been followed by the 
Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj Baldeokishan v. Stateand the Mysore High Court in Veerabhadrappa v. 
Govinda. In the present case, the amount in question was seized from the accused in pursuance of statements 
made by them under Section 27 of the Evidence Act. The High Court as well as the courts below have found the 
property to be the subject of theft and the acquittal of the accused is upon benefit.” 


31. The Supreme Court in Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar, (1981) 2 SCC 493 with reference to the bar under Section 
162 of the Cr.P.C viz. against use in evidence of statement made before a police officer in the course of investigation, 
held, the same would not apply where court calls for such statement in a civil proceeding provided the statement is 
otherwise relevant under the Evidence Act, 1872. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. Before we refer to the provisions of Sections 162 and 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it would be 
convenient to set out briefly a few relevant provisions of that Code. Section 2 is the definition section and clause 
(g) of that section defines “inquiry” to mean “every inquiry, other than a trial conducted under this Code by a 
Magistrate or court”. Clause (a) of Section 2 gives the definition of “investigation” and it says that 
investigation includes “all the proceedings under this Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police 
officer or by any person (other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf”. Section 4 
provides: 


“4. (1) All offences under the Penal Code, 1860 shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise 
dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 


(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and otherwise dealt with 
according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment for the time being in force regulating the 
manner or place of investigating, inquiring into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.” 


It is apparent from this section that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are applicable where an 
offence under the Penal Code, 1860 or under any other law is being investigated, inquired into, tried or 
otherwise dealt with. Then we come straight to Section 162 which occurs in Chapter XII dealing with the powers 
of the police to investigate into offences. That section, so far as material, reads as under: 


“162. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this 
Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or 
any record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be 
used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial whose statement has 
been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly proved, may be used by the 
accused, and with the permission of the court, by the prosecution, to contradict such witness in the 
manner provided by Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is 
so used, any part thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only 
of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions of 
clause (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect the provisions of Section 27 of that 
Act.” 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 19 


32. 


It bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, 
whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms of the section, this bar is applicable 
only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made”’. If the statement made before a police officer in the 
course of an investigation under Chapter XII is sought to be used in any proceeding other than an inquiry or 
trial or even at an inquiry or trial but in respect of an offence other than that which was under investigation at 
the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 162 would not be attracted. This section has been 
enacted for the benefit of the accused, as pointed out by this Court in Tahsildar Singh v. State of U.P. it is 
intended “to protect the accused against the user of statements of witnesses made before the police during 
investigation, at the trial presumably on the assumption that the said statements were not made under 
circumstances inspiring confidence”. This Court, in Tahsildar Singh case approved the following observations 
of Braund, J. in Emperor v. Aftab Mohd. Khan: 


“As it seems to us it is to protect accused persons from being prejudiced by statements made to police 
officers who by reason of the fact that an investigation is known to be on foot at the time the statement is 
made, may be in a position to influence the maker of it, and, on the other hand, to protect accused persons 
from the prejudice at the hands of persons who in the knowledge that an investigation has already started, 
are prepared to tell untruths” 


and expressed its agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court in 
BaliramTikaram Marathe v. Emperorthat “the object of the section is to protect the accused both against 
overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses”. Protection against the use of statement made before the 
police during investigation is, therefore, granted to the accused by providing that such statement shall not be 
allowed to be used except for the limited purpose set out in the proviso to the section, at any inquiry or trial in 
respect of the offence which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made. But, this 
protection is unnecessary in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under 
investigation and hence the bar created by the section is a limited bar. It has no application, for example in a 
civil proceeding or in a proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution and a statement made before a 
police officer in the course of investigation can be used as evidence in such proceeding, provided it is otherwise 
relevant under the Indian Evidence Act. There are a number of decisions of various High Courts which have 
takenthis view and amongst them may be mentioned the decision of Jaganmohan Reddy, J. in Malakala Surya 
Rao v.G. Janakamma. The present proceeding before us is a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution 
filed by the petitioners for enforcing their Fundamental Rights under Article 21 and it is neither an “inquiry” 
nor a “trial” in respect of any offence and hence it is difficult to see how Section 162 can be invoked by the 
State in the present case. The procedure to be followed in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is 
prescribed in Order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, and sub-rule (9) of Rule 10 lays down that at the 
hearing of the rule nisi, if the court is of the opinion that an opportunity be given to the parties to establish their 
respective cases by leading further evidence, the court may take such evidence or cause such evidence to be 
taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and obviously the reception of such evidence will be 
governed by the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act. It is obvious, therefore, that even a statement made 
before, a police officer during investigation can be produced and used in evidence in a writ petition under 
Article 32 provided it is relevant under the Indian Evidence Act and Section 162 cannot be urged as a bar 
against its production or use. The reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh setting forth the result of his 
investigation cannot, in the circumstances, be shut out from being produced and considered in evidence under 
Section 162, even if they refer to any statements made before him and his associates during investigation, 
provided they are otherwise relevant under some provision of the Indian Evidence Act.” 


With reference to police diaries and Section 172 of the Cr.P.C., the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) held as 


under: 


“.. These reports are clearly relevant under Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act which reads as follows: 


“35. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record, stating a fact in issue or relevant 
fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person in 
performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register or record 
is kept, is itself a relevant fact.” 


These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by whom the twenty- 
four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh L.V. Singh, a public servant, in the 
discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and indubitably covered by Section 35. The language of 
Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary to refer to any decided cases on the interpretation of that section, 
but we may cite two decisions to illustrate the applicability of this section in the present case. The first is the 
decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla. There the question was whether reports 
made by officers of the CID (Special Branch) relating to public meetings covered by them at the time of the 
election were relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they were, on the ground that they were (SCC 


20 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


33. 


p. 667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official duty and they were relevant under the first part of 
Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they contained statements showing what were the public meetings held by 
the first respondent”. This Court in fact followed an earlier decision of the Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. 
Perumal. So also in Jagdat v. Sheopal, Wazirhasan, J. held that the result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under 
Section 202 of the Code of CriminalProcedure, 1898 embodied in the report is an entry in a public record 
stating a fact in issue and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duties and the report is 
therefore admissible in evidence under Section 35. We find that a similar view was taken by a Division Bench of 
the Nagpur High Court in Chandulal v. Pushkar Rajwhere the learned Judges held that reports made by 
Revenue Officers, though not regarded as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the private 
rights of the parties are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the discharge of their 
official duties, insofar as they supply information of official proceedings and historical facts. The Calcutta High 
Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B. that official correspondence from the Forest Officer 
to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried on by the Forest Officer in the discharge of his official duty 
would be admissible in evidence under Section 35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind that the reports 
made by Sh L.V. Singh setting forth the result of the investigation carried on by him and his associates are 
clearly relevant under Section 35 since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant in the 
discharge of his official duty. It is indeed difficult to see how in a writ petition against the State Government 
where the complaint is that the police officials of the State Government blinded the petitioners at the time of 
arrest or whilst in police custody, the State Government can resist production of a report in regard to the truth 
or otherwise of the complaint, made by a highly placed officer pursuant to the direction issued by the State 
Government. We are clearly of the view that the reports made by Shri L.V. Singh as a result of the investigation 
carried out by him and his associates are relevant under Section 35 and they are liable to be produced by the 
State Government and used in evidence in the present writ petition. Of course, what evidentiary value must 
attach to the statements contained in these reports is a matter which would have to be decided by the court after 
considering these reports. It may ultimately be found that these reports have not much evidentiary value and 
even if they contain any statements adverse to the State Government, it may be possible for the State 
Government to dispute their correctness or to explain them away, but it cannot be said that these reports are not 
relevant. These reports must therefore be produced by the State and taken on record of the present writ petition. 
We may point out that though in our order dated February 16, 1981 we have referred to these reports as having 
been made by Shri L.V. Singh and his associates between January 10 and January 20, 1981 it seems that there 
has been some error on our part in mentioning the outer date as January 20, 1981 for we find that some of these 
reports were submitted by Shri L.V. Singh even after January 20, 1981 and the last of them was submitted on 
January 27, 1981. All these reports including the report submitted on December 9, 1980 must therefore be filed 
by the State and taken as forming part of the record to beconsidered by the court in deciding the question at 
issue between the parties.” 


The Supreme Court in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597, again held that bar of Section 


162 of the Cr.P.C. is with regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police officer under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. and by virtue of Section 162 Cr.P.C. would be applicable only where such statement is sought to 
be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. 
The relevant extract of the said decision is as under: 


“14. On account of Section 162 CrPC, a statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of 
investigation under Chapter XII, if reduced into writing, will not be signed by the person making it, nor such 
statement recorded or any part thereof be used for any purpose at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence 
under investigation at the time when such statement was made. Such statement may be used by an accused and 
with the permission of the court by the prosecution to contradict the witness whose statement was recorded by 
the police in the manner provided under Section 145 of the Evidence Act and can also be used for re- 
examination of such witness for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 
Bar of Section 162 CrPC of proving the statement recorded by the police officer of any person during 
investigation however shall not apply to any statement falling within the provision of Clause (1) of Section 32 of 
the Evidence Act, nor shall it affect Section 27 of the Evidence Act. Bar of Section 162 CrPC is in regard to the 
admissibility of the statement recorded of a person by the police officer under Section 161 CrPC and by virtue 
of Section 162 CrPC would be applicable only where such statement is sought to be used at any inquiry or trial 
in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. 


15. In Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar this Court has held that Section 162 CrPC bars the use of any statement 
made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter XII, whether recorded in the 
police diary or otherwise. However, by the express terms of Section 162, this bar is applicable only where such 
statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or trial” in respect of any offence under investigation at the time 
when such statement was made. If the statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation 
under Chapter XII is sought to be used in any proceeding, inquiry or trial in respect of an offence other than 
which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 162 will not be 
attracted.” 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 21 


34. After examining the aforementioned provisions, as well as the legal principles established in a catena of 
judgments, and considering that the inquiry before this Tribunal does not entail adjudicating the guilt of the accused 
but rather assessing the adequacy of material before the Central Government to designate JKDFP as an unlawful 
association, the statement of witnesses record by the police officers, the statements made by the accused before police 
officers, along with the lists of items seized and seizure memos, are deemed admissible before this Tribunal. They can 
be utilized to ascertain the sufficiency of material before the Central Government for making the declaration under 
Section 3(1) of UAPA. 


V. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED BY THIS TRIBUNAL 


35. Consequently, upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification No. 4348 dated 5th October, 2023 and 
Notification No.4639 (E) dated 23rd October, 2023, this Tribunal held a preliminary hearing on 09.11.2023, 
whereupon on a consideration of the material placed on record by the Central Government, notice under Section 4(2) 
of the Act was issued to the JKDFP to show cause, within a period of 30 days, as to why they ought not to be declared 
as unlawful association. The notices issued were given due publicity as required under Section 3(4) of the Act. 


36. The Gazettee Notification dated 05.10.2023 was also published in two National Newspapers (all India Edition), 
out of which one was in English while the other was in Hindi. The said notification was also published in two local 
newspapers in vernacular language having wide circulation in the States where the activities of the JKDFP were or are 
believed to be ordinarily carried out. The method of affixation and proclamation by beating of drums, as well as 
loudspeakers, was also adopted. Proclamation was made at the last known address of the JKDFP along with all their 
leaders, members, factions, wings and front organization as well as that of their principal office bearers. 


37. The notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 05.10.2023 was displayed on the 
notice board of the Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate/Tehsildar in all the district headquarters of the States 
where the activities of the association were or are believed to be ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India Radio and 
electronic media of the State edition was also taken. Announcements were made through radio/electronic media at 
prime time. 


38. Apart from above, notices were also issued to the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir through its Chief 
Secretary. 


39. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance of the service of notice issued to 
the JKDFP in the manner indicated. The Registrar was directed to file an independent report in that behalf before the 
next date of hearing, i.e. 15.12.2023. 


40. Accordingly, both the Union of India as well as the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir filed affidavits of 
service, affirming that service had been effected as directed by the Tribunal. The Registrar, vide his report dated 
14.12.2023, also confirmed service of notice issued by the Tribunal. 


41. This Tribunal having satisfied itself that service had been effected on JKDFP as per the directions contained in 
the order dated 09.11.2023; coupled with the fact that no appearance was entered by and on behalf of JKDFP, was 
constrained to proceed further with the inquiry even without the participation of the concerned association. 


42. However, in order to afford an opportunity to both the Central and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
to lead evidence in support of their respective averments, allegations and/or grounds set out in the Notification dated 
05.10.2023, as also to give another opportunity to JEKDFP to rebut the material placed on record by the Central and the 
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, by the same order, i.e., order dated 15.12.2023, further proceedings were 
fixed on 17.01.2023 and 18.01.2023 at Jammu with due consent of the counsels appearing for the UOI and the Union 
Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. Accordingly, a public notice was issued for the hearing at Jammu. 


43. Learned Additional Solicitor General informed the Tribunal on 03.01.2024 that substantive affidavits, six (06) in 
numbers, by way of evidence were filed on behalf of the witnesses from Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir on 
02.01.2024 and that additional eight (08) further affidavits were proposed to be filed of various witnesses who would 
be deposing on behalf of the Central Government in support of the notification. 


44. Accordingly, on 17.01.2024 statement of the following witnesses of the Union of India were recorded at 
Jammu:- 


S. | Name of Witness Details of Affidavit Affidavits kept in 
No. along with date volumes and at pages 
1. | Mr. Raies Ahmad Mir, Sub — Divisional Police Ex. PW-1/A dated Part-IV B, Vol-I 
Officer, Sopore, Baramulla, Kashmir 17.01.2024 Page Nos. 9 to 43 
2. | Mohammad Muzzafar Jan, Sub — Divisional Police Ex. PW-2/A dated Part-IV B, Vol-I 
Officer, Kangan, Ganderbal, Kashmir 17.01.2024 Page Nos. 44 to 65 
3. | Mr. Javid Ahmad, Deputy Superintendant of Police, | Ex. PW-7/A dated Part-IV B, Vol-I 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Shopian, Kashmir 17.01.2024 Page Nos. 165 to 203 
4. | Mohammad SaleemBhat, Deputy Superintendant of | Ex. PW-8/A dated Part-IV B, Vol-II 

Police, Handwara, Kashmir 17.01.2024 Page Nos. 204 to 233 
5. | Syed Al-Tahir Gilani, Senior Superintendant of Ex. PW-10/A dated Part-IV B, Vol-II 

Police, Budgam, Kashmir 17.01.2024 Page Nos. 282 to 337 
i Mohammed Rafee Rather, Deputy Superintendant Ex. PW-11/A dated Part-IV B, Vol-II 

of Police, Kupwara, Kashmir 17.01.2024 Page Nos. 338 to 363 


45. On the same date i.e. 17.01.2024, Union of India was directed to ensure that any interested party who desires to 
appear physically before the Tribunal on 17.01.2024 and 18.01.2024 should be duly assisted for the said purpose. For 
the said purpose, Sub-Inspector Veer Kumar, PID No.876256 (EXK) from the Security Wing was deputed for 
17.01.2024 and 18.01.2024 for facilitating the appearance of any interested party who desires to appear before this 


Tribunal. 
46. On 18.01.2024, statements of the following witnesses were recorded at Jammu:- 
S. Name of Witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in 
No. along with date volumes and at pages 
1. Mr. Abid Rashid, Deputy Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-3/A dated | Part-IV B, Vol-I 
Sumbal, Bandipura, Kashmir 18.01.2024 Page Nos. 66 to 91 
2. Mr. Sagib Ghani, Deputy Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-4/A _ dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-I 
Headquarters, Budgam, Kashmir 18.01.2024 Page Nos. 92 to 117 
3. Mr. Rameez Rashid Bhat, Deputy Superintendent of | Ex. PW-5/A 062०१ | Part-IV B, Vol-I 
Police, Bijbehara, Anantnag, Kashmir 18.01.2024 Page Nos. 118 to 141 
4. Mr. Shah Umar, Deputy Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-6/A 962०१ | Part-IV B, Vol-I 
Bijbehara, Anantnag, Kashmir 18.01.2024 Page Nos. 142 to 164 
ay Mr. Arif Hussain, Deputy Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-9/A dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-II 
Kulgam, Kashmir 18.01.2024 Page Nos. 234 to 281 
47. Vide the same order i.e. 18.01.2024, learned counsel for the Union of India further submitted that at least five 


(05) more affidavits of evidence shall be filed on behalf of various officers of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, 
which shall be filed on or before 29.01.2024. The matter was thereafter listed for 24.01.2024 in New Delhi. 


48. The Tribunal could not assemble on 24.01.2024 and the next date was fixed for 31.01.2024 for drawing up the 
schedule for further recording of evidence. 


49. On 31.01.2024 it was submitted that eight (08) more affidavits of evidence would be filed by various officers 
from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. Matter was next fixed for 09.02.2024 for recording of evidence of 
four (04) out of eight (08) witnesses. The order dated 09.02.2024 records that six (06) more affidavits had been filed 
on behalf of UT of Jammu and Kashmir on 06.02.2024. Matter was, thus, posted for 16.02.2024 for the purpose of 


recording evidence. 


50. Statements of following five (04) witnesses was recorded on 16.02.2024 at Delhi High Court, New Delhi:- 
S. | Name of witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in 
No. along with date volumes and at pages 
1. Ms. P.D. Nitya, IPS, SSP, Pulwama, Kashmir Ex. PW-12/A_ dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-III 
16.02.2024 Page Nos. 365 to 458 
2. Dr. Sumit Sharma, Sub-Divisional Police Officer, | Ex. PW-13/A Part-IV B, Vol-III 
Kothibagh, Srinagar, Kashmir dated 16.02.2024 Page Nos. 461 to 491 
3. Mr. ShahjhanChoudhary, Sub-Divisional Police Officer, | Ex. PW-14/A_ dated | Part-IV B, Vol-III 
West Srinagar, Kashmir 16.02.2024 Page Nos. 492 to 512 
4. Mr. Ashaq Hussain Dar, Sub-Divisional Police Officer, | Ex. PW-15/A dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-III 
Zakoora, Kashmir 16.02.2024 Page Nos. 513 to 556 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


51. Also, vide order dated 16.02.2024, Union of India was granted further time to file three (03) more affidavits, as 
requested, within two days and the matter was posted for 19.02.2024 for directions. 


52. On 19.02.2024, the matter was further posted for directions on 21.02.2024 as the learned counsel for the Union 
of India submitted that affidavit of evidence of witnesses from NIA, Delhi Police and ED would also be filed on or 
before 26.02.2024. 


53. With the consent of learned counsel, the matter was fixed for recording of evidence of five (05) witnesses of the 
Jammu and Kashmir Police on 02.03.2024 at 11.00 AM at Srinagar. Directions for issuing a public notice in this 
regard were also issued. 


54. Accordingly, on 02.03.2024 statement of the following five (05) witnesses of the Union of India was recorded at 
Srinagar, and the matter was directed to be listed for recording of evidence of witnesses from NIA and ED on 
07.03.2023 at New Delhi:- 


S. | Name of witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in 
No. along with date volumes and at pages 
1. | Mr. Sajad Ahmad Sheikh, Addl. Superintendent of | Ex. PW-16/A dated | Part-IV B, Vol-IV 
Police, Anantnag, Kashmir 02.03.2024 Page Nos. 557 to 756 
2. Mr. Syed Yasir Qadri, Addl. Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-17/A dated | Part-IV B, Vol-IV 
Baramulla, Kashmir 02.03.2024 Page Nos. 757 to 812 
3. Mr. Murtaza Ahmad, Dy. Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-18/A dated | Part-IV B, Vol-V 
CIK, Kashmir 02.03.2024 Page Nos. 813 to 844 
4. Mohd. Ashrif, SDPO, Sadder, Kashmir Ex. PW-19/A_ dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-V 
02.03.2024 Page Nos. 845 to 913 
5. Mr. Fayaz Hussain Geelani, SDPO, Shaheed Gunj, | Ex. PW-20/A_ dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-V 
Kashmir 02.03.2024 Page Nos. 914 to 975 
55. On 07.03.2024, statement of the following witness from the National Investigation Agency (NIA) was recorded 


at Delhi High Court, New Delhi, and the matter was posted for 11.03.2024 for recording of statement of the 
remaining witness/s of the Union of India at New Delhi: 


S. Name of witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in 
No. along with date volumes and at pages 
1. Mr.B.B. Pathak, Deputy Superintendent of Police, | Ex. PW-22/A dated | Part-IV B, Vol-VII & 
National Investigation Agency (NIA), New Delhi 07.03.2024 Vill 
Page Nos.1265_ to 
1873 


56. On 11.03.2024, statement of the following witness from Enforcement Directorate (ED) was recorded at Delhi 
High Court, New Delhi, and the matter was posted for 12.03.2024 for recording of statement of the concerned 
witness from Ministry of Home Affairs at New Delhi: 


| S. Name of witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in 

No. along with date volumes and at pages 
1. Mr. Mayank Arora, Assistant Director, Enforcement | Ex. PW-21/A dated | Part-IV B, Vol-VI 

Directorate (ED), Delhi Zonal Office-II, New Delhi 11.03.2024 Page Nos.976 to 1264 


57. On 12.03.2024, at the request of the learned Additional Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the Union of 
India, the examination of the witness of the Union of India was deferred till 13.03.2024. 


58. On 13.03.2024, elaborate submissions were heard on the application filed on behalf of the Union of India under 
Section 123 of the Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) of the UAP Rules, 1968 claiming privilege / confidentiality in 
respect of certain documents submitted in a sealed envelope; and as referred to in the paragraph 11 of the affidavit of 
the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. It was held that the prayer made in the application shall be 
dealt with in the final report / judgment of this Tribunal and subject thereto, the sealed envelope containing the 
concerned documents in respect of which the privilege had been claimed, was opened, and the documents were taken 
on record. 


59. Vide the same order dated 13.03.2024, statement of the following witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs 
was recorded separately at Delhi High Court, New Delhi:- 


24 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


S.No. | Name of witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in 
along with date volumes and at pages 
1. Mr. Dharmender Kumar, Deputy Secretary, | Ex. PW-23/A dated | Part-IV 8, Vol-IX 
Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, | 13.03.2024 Page Nos.1874 to 1919 
New Delhi 


60. After recording of the statement, as aforesaid, on 13.03.2024, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for 
the Union of India commenced final arguments, which, however, remained inconclusive. Hence, the matter was listed 
for final arguments on 14.03.2024 at New Delhi. 


61. On 14.03.2024, learned Additional Solicitor General for the Union of India was heard at some length, and the 
matter was listed for clarification / further arguments, if any, on 22.03.2024. On 22.03.2024, the order in the matter 
was reserved. 


VI. NON-APPEARANCE/NO REPLY ON BEHALF OF THE ASSOCIATION IN THESE PROCEEDINGS 


62. Despite service of notice upon Shabir Ahmad Shah/JKDFP, the concerned association has not entered 
appearance to contest the notification under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. Despite opportunities afforded, no reply has 
been filed on behalf of the concerned association, as contemplated under Section 4(2) of the Act. This Tribunal has 
also not received any intimation from any interested party seeking to depose before this Tribunal. 


63. Ample opportunity has been afforded by this Tribunal to the concerned association/ its office bearers to appear 
before this Tribunal and give their written version/ adduce evidence, in opposition to the factual version of the Central 
government as regards the activities of the concerned association. Apart from effecting service on the association and 
its office bearers in the manner aforesaid, this Tribunal even held public hearing/s in Jammu and Srinagar to enable 
members of the concerned association and/ or member of the public, to participate in the proceedings of the Tribunal. 
However, the said opportunity was not availed of by the association or any of its office bearers. 


64. This tribunal is conscious that despite non-appearance of the concerned organization, this tribunal is required to 
make an “objective determination” as mandated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(supra). The credibility of the material/evidence placed on record by the Central Government is required to be tested; 
the Supreme Court has cautioned that the procedure to be adopted must achieve this purpose and must not be reduced 
to mere acceptance of the “ipse dixit of the Central Government”. 


65. Thus, notwithstanding the non-appearance on behalf of the concerned association, this Tribunal is required to 
independently assess the credibility of the material / evidence placed on record by the Central Government, and on 
that basis, come to a conclusion as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. 


VII. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 
PW-1 


66. Mr. Raies Ahmad (PW-1) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-1/A and deposed that he is posted as a Sub- 
Divisional Police Officer at Sopore, Baramulla, Kashmir and he is the supervisory officer in respect of FIR No. 
205/2008, which was registered on 11.08.2008 at P.S. Sopore against Shabir Ahmad Shah, Mushtaq-ul-Islam, Shakeel 
Ahmad Bakshi, Bilal Ahmad Trali u/s 147/148/149/188/336/332/ 427/121-A and 153A of Ranbir Penal Code since 
the said persons gathered on that day at 10.30 hours at Old Hospital Crossing, Sopore and started raising slogans 
‘Jeevey Jeevey Pakistan, Pakistan Zindabad, Hum Kya Chahtay Azadi, Geelani Sahabka kya farman Kashmir Banega 
Pakistan’ and then pelted stones at the security forces and the Government vehicles. He further deposed that the said 
separatist leaders instigated the mob to damage government and public property and spread fear and anarchy in the 
area; and this was done by inciting the co-accused and the local Kashmiri Muslim population to bring about such 
cession and secession with intention to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. He has relied upon the 
documents which have been exhibited as Ex.PW-1/1A to PW-1/10A in the present proceedings. These include a copy 
of FIR and the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. He deposed that the investigation is still 
ongoing and has not yet been completed. However, the same is at the final stage and the charge-sheet is likely to be 
filed shortly. 


67. He further deposed that from the investigation in the case and during the course of discharge of his official 
duties, it is evident that the JKDFP has an agenda of disturbing the peace and to bring about a secession of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and to spread disharmony, hence, the ban imposed on the said 
organization by the Central Government is in the national interest as well as in the interest of the general public. 


68. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


PW-2 


69. Mohammad Muzzafar Jan (PW-2) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW2/A and deposed that he is posted as a 
Sub-Divisional Police Officer at Kangan, Ganderbal, Kashmir and he is the supervisory officer in respect of FIR 
No.77/2014, which was registered under sections 153/153A/120A/121 of the Ranbir Penal Code against Shabir 
Ahmad Shah since on 22.08.2014 after completion of the Friday prayers separatist leader Shabir Ahmad Shah 
appeared at Jama Masjid, Kangan and delivered a hate speech to the local public and asked them not to participate in 
the General Assembly Elections and to alienate Kashmir from the Union of India. He has relied upon the documents 
which have been exhibited as Ex.PW-1/1A to PW-1/10A in the present proceedings. These include a copy of the FIR 
and the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C and Section 164 Cr.P.C. He deposed that one of the 
witnesses, Head Constable Mohmmad Yakoob, in his statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. (Ex. PW-2/2A) 
corroborated the above incident. 


70. He further deposed that Shabir Ahmad Shah, chairman of JKDFP was not only inciting violence in the territory 
of Jammu and Kashmir, but also encouraging the separatist movement and had been advocating the claims for 
secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. He further deposed that the activities of JKDFP as 
summarized in his affidavit is based on the investigation of the said FIR as also on the basis of knowledge derived by 
him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He also submitted that the cogent and irrefutable evidence 
which has emerged manifests that JKDFP, its chairman Shabir Ahmad Shah and its other leaders and members have 
been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned organizations and are openly advocating the 
inciting people to bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India; and that the activities of 
JKDFP is aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred 
against the lawful government and indulging and acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
sovereignty of the Union of India; and that the ban on JKDFP is valid and is warranted in the national interest. 


71. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-3 


72. Abid Rashid (PW-3) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW3/A and deposed that he is posted as a Sub-Divisional 
Police Officer at Sumbal, Bandipora, Kashmir. He deposed that the FIR No.52/2015 was registered in respect of an 
incident which took place on 27.03.2015 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah came at Naidkhai area and after culmination of 
Friday prayers, he delivered a speech to the public gathering wherein he also raised anti-India and pro-Pakistan 
slogans and has also instigated the general public against the Government of Jammu and Kashmir and sovereignty and 
integrity of India. Pursuant thereto, investigation into the case was conducted and statements of witnesses were 
recorded under Sections 161 and 164-A of Cr.P.C. He further deposed on the basis of the incriminating material 
collected, a charge-sheet was filed in the case on 27.11.2021 before the Special TADA Court, Baramulla against 
Shabir Ahmad Shah, and the trial of the case is still pending. He has relied upon certified true copies of the FIR 
No.52/2015 and the charge-sheet pursuant thereto, English version of the copy of the statement of the witnesses which 
have been exhibited as Ex.PW-3/1A to PW-3/8A in the present proceedings. 


73. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit are on the basis of the records maintained in 
his district; upon a perusal of the record of the investigation of the aforesaid FIR No.52/2015, as also based on the 
knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He further deposed that the ban on the 
organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned 
organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully 
established government and the Union of India. 


74. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-4 


75. Saqgib Ghani (PW-4) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW4/A and deposed that he is posted as a Sub-Divisional 
Police Officer at Headquarters, Budgam, Kashmir and he is the Supervisory Officer in respect of FIR No.114/2014, 
which was registered in respect of an incident which took place on 13.06.2014 at about 14.45 hours after the Friday 
prayers wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah appeared at Narullahpora Chowk, Budgam and after stopping the traffic on the 
main road, started addressing the general public against the sovereignty and unity of India and had also instigated 
them to secede the then State of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India as also raised anti-India slogans. He 
further deposed that during investigation it was revealed that the incident was witnessed by many local people 
including two police officials, and, hence, the statements of the eye witnesses were recorded under Section 161 
Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident. He deposed that after collecting sufficient evidence in the case against 
accused Shabir Ahmad Shah, the charge-sheet was filed before the NIA Court, Budgam, where the trial of the case is 
still pending. He has relied upon the certified true copies of the FIR No.114/2014 and the charge-sheet (Ex.PW-4/2A) 
pursuant thereto, English version of the copy of the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C 
which have been exhibited as Ex.PW-4/1A to PW-4/6A in the present proceedings. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


76. He also submitted that the material available on record shows that JKDFP, its chairman Shabir Ahmad Shah and 
its other leaders and members have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned organizations 
and are openly advocating the inciting people to bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India; and that the activities of JKDFP is aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and indulging and acting in a manner prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India; and that the ban on JKDFP is valid and is warranted in the 
national interest. He lastly deposed that the statement made in his affidavit are on the basis of the records maintained 
in his district as also upon a perusal of the record of the investigation of the aforesaid FIR No.114/2014 as also based 
on the knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He further deposed that the ban 
on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned 
organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully 
established government and the Union of India. 


77. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-5 


78. Rameez Rashid Bhat (PW-5) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW5/A and deposed that he is posted as a Deputy 
Superintendent of Police, Police Station Hajin, Bandipora, and is the Supervisory Officer in respect of FIR 
No.17/2014, which was registered in respect of an incident which took place on 07.03.2014 wherein Shabir Ahmad 
Shah along with other separatist leaders of JKHC, namely Mushtaq-ul-Islam, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Bashir Ahmad 
Dar, Mohammad Yousuf Nagash and Mohammad Yaseen gathered the general public at main chowk Hajin and 
threatened them with dire consequences for participating in the general elections and raised anti-national slogans 
‘Pakistan Zindabad’. He further deposed that the above said persons with intent to threaten the sovereignty of India, 
raised anti-national slogans and the said procession was organized without any permission from the administration. He 
deposed that during investigation, statements of witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. were recorded, who corroborated 
the above incident, and thereafter, the charge-sheet was filed before the concerned court, where the trial of the case is 
still pending. He has relied upon the certified true copy of the FIR No.17/2014 and the charge-sheet pursuant thereto, 
English version of the copy of the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C which have been 
exhibited as Ex.PW-5/1A to PW-5/6A in the present proceedings. 


79. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is on the basis of the records maintained in 
his district as also upon a perusal of the record of the investigation of the aforesaid FIR No.17/2014 as also based on 
the knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He deposed that the material 
available on record shows that JKDFP, its chairman Shabir Ahmad Shah and its other leaders and members have been 
actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned organizations and are openly inciting people to bring 
about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India; and that the activities of JKDFP is aimed at 
causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful 
government and indulging and acting in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union 
of India. He lastly deposed that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law 
and order and to prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


80. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-6 


81. Shah Umar (PW-6) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW6/A and deposed that that he is posted as a Sub-Divisional 
Police Officer, Bijbehara, Anantnag, Kashmir and now posted as a Deputy Superintendent of Police in Zonal Police, 
Kashmir. He deposed that he is the Supervisory Officer in respect of FIR No.157/2011, which was registered in 
respect of an incident which took place on 10.07.2011 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah along with other separatist leaders 
gathered a mob at Kanelwan, Bijbehara and instigated the general public against the Union of India and also raised 
anti-national slogans with intent of harming integrity and sovereignty of the country. He further deposed that the said 
separatist leaders also spread fear and anarchy in the area. He has relied upon certified true copies of the FIR 
No.157/2011 and the charge-sheet pursuant thereto, English version of the copy of the statement of the witnesses 
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C which have been exhibited as Ex.PW-6/1A to PW-6/3A in the present proceedings. 


82. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit are on the basis of the records maintained in 
his district as also upon a perusal of the record of the investigation of the aforesaid FIR No.157/2011 as also based on 
the knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He further deposed that the ban on 
the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned 
organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully 
established government and the Union of India. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


83. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-7 


84. Javid Ahmad (PW-7) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-7/A and deposed that he is posted as a Deputy 
Superintendent of Police at Shopian, Kashmir. He deposed that on the basis of the activities of JKDFP and its 
leaders/chairman, FIR No.173/2012 under sections 148/149/336/323/341/427 of the Ranbir Penal Code was registered 
at P.S. Shopian against Shabir Ahmad Shah, Shameem Ahmad Khan, Zaffar Akbar Bhat, Javaid Ahmad Mir, 
Mohammad Abdullah Tari, Mukhtar Ahmad Sofi, Yasmeen Raja, Shabir Ahmad Dar, Feeroz Ahmad Dar, 
Mohammed Shafi Rather, Mohammed Ibrahim Bhat and Zameer Ahmad Sheikh since on 08.06.2012, after the 
culmination of the Friday prayers at Jama Masjid, Shopian, these persons appeared there and instigated the general 
public and started pelting stones at the police party due to which some police personnel got injured and police vehicles 
and public property were damaged. He deposed that said unlawful assembly was not a democratic assembly 
demanding any democratic constitutional right but was unlawful assembly which was intended to bring cession and 
secession of territory of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and thus, intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India. He further deposed that on the basis of the investigation and sufficient material gathered 
against the accused persons, a charge-sheet was filed in the case on 31.12.2012 in the court of Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Shopian. 


85. He deposed that another FIR No.122/2014 under Section 13 of the UAPA Act was registered at P.S. Shopian 
against the accused persons, namely, Shabir Ahmad Shah and other separatist leaders including Mohd. Yousuf 
Makaie, Mohd. Amin Parrey, Shakeel ah. Itoo, Mohd. Yousuf Nakash, Mohd. Yousuf Mir, Sb. Ahad Para (General 
Secretary of Muslim League), Mohd. Yousuf Ganie @ Falaie, Shakeel Ahmad Thokar, who all appeared with a mob 
and delivered provocative speeches to the local youth in order to disturb the peace and raised anti-India and pro- 
Pakistan slogans like “Hindustan Murdabad”, “Pakistan Zindabad”, “Hum Kya Chahtay Azadi” etc. and forced the 
shopkeepers to close their shops and called for strike. He deposed that investigation of the case was conducted and 
statements of witnesses were recorded wherein an eye witness of the incident Farooq Ahmad Wani, a local resident, 
stated in his statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. that Mohd. Rafiq Parray, Shakeel Ahmad Itoo, Mohd. 
YousufGanie @ Falaie, Rayees Ahmad Khan, Sheel Ahmad Malik, Shakir Ahmad Malik, Imran Ahmad Khan, 
Muzafar Ahmad Mangnoo, Suheeel Ahmad Ganie and Shakeel Ahmad Thoker led a violent mob who pelted stones at 
CRPF and Police nafri and raised slogans like “nara takbeer allah hu akbar” and directed the shopkeepers to close 
their shops. He further deposed that statements of other witnesses were also recorded under Sections 161 and 164 
Cr.P.C. (Ex.PW-7/7A, 7/8A and 7/9A), who disclosed the role of accused persons. He deposed that after the situation 
became conducive in the Valley, based on the credible material collected against the accused persons, a charge-sheet 
(Ex.PW-7/4A) in the case was prepared and filed on 01.08.2023 before the JMIC, Shopian. 


86. He has relied upon the certified true English copies of the above FIRs along with the charge-sheet filed therein 
as also the statement of witnesses under Sections 161 and 164 of the Cr.P.C. which have been exhibited as Ex.PW- 
T/A to Ex.PW-7/9A in the present proceedings. 


87. He further deposed that the statements made by him in his affidavit are based not only on the basis of the 
investigation in the aforesaid FIRs but also on the basis of knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge 
of his official duties while dealing with similar such cases wherein also the offensive nature of the activities of the 
JKDFP had come to light. He further deposed that the ban on JKDFP is justified and is necessary for the purpose of 
preserving law and order in Jammu and Kashmir and also to prevent the said organization from spreading feelings of 
disaffection and disloyalty towards the Union of India. 


88. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-8 


89. Mohammed Saleem Bhat (PW-8) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-8/A and deposed that he is posted as a 
Deputy Superintendent of Police at Handwara, District Kupwara, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer in respect of 
FIR No.44/2015, registered under Sections 147/124-A of Ranbir Penal Code and under Section 13 of the Unlawful 
Activities Prevention Act at P.S. Kralgund, Kupwara, which was registered in respect of an incident which took place 
on 22.05.2015 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah along with other separatist leaders, namely, Ajaj Ahmad Shah @ Sahba, 
PeerzadaNaseer Hussain, Rayees Ahmad Bhat, Parvaiz Ahmad Mir, Waheed Ahmad Bhat, Sajad Ahmad Shah, Feroaz 
Ahmad Mir, Danish Tasaduk Paray and Irfan Ahmad Lone appeared at village Ashpora, Kralgund along with a mob 
with Pakistani flags and delivered anti-India speech to the general public, thereby provoking and instigating the youth 
of the area against the Indian Government. He deposed that based on the material collected during investigation, a 
charge-sheet was prepared and after conditions became conducive in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir, the charge- 
sheet in the case was filed on 01.04.2023 in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Handwara. He deposed that 
statements of witnesses were recorded under Sections 161 and 164-A Cr.P.C. (Ex.PW-8/8A). He deposed that the said 
separatist leaders belonged to a separatist organization Hurriyat and stated in their speech that they will continuously 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


struggle for freedom of Kashmir from India. He has relied upon the certified true copies of the FIR No.44/2015 and 
the English translation of the charge-sheet pursuant thereto; copies of the statement of the witnesses recorded under 
Section 161 Cr.P.C. and 164-A of the Cr.P.C.; which have been Ex.PW-8/1A to PW-8/8A in the present proceedings. 


90. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based upon a perusal of the record of the 
investigation of the aforesaid FIR as also based on the knowledge derived by him from the record of the investigation 
from other such similar cases against the concerned organization and its chief Shabir Ahmad Shah. He further 
submitted that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to 
prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


91. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-9 


92. Arif Hussain (PW-9) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-9/A and deposed that he is presently working as a 
Deputy Superintendent of Police, Kulgam, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer of the FIR Nos.33/2004 and 
192/2014. He deposed that FIR No. 33/2004 under Sections 120-B/153-B/124-A/147/149 of Ranbir Penal Code was 
registered at P.S. Kulgam in respect of an incident which took place on 25.02.2004 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah, 
chairman of JKDFP along with other separatist leaders, namely, Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Mohd. SaleemZargar, Zahoor 
Ahmad Shaikh, Parvaiz Ahmad Dar and Mohd. Magqbool Sofi visited Zangalpora for participating in cremation of 
Abdul Majeed Mir @ Arif Khan, Divisional Commander of the terrorist outfit Hizbul Mujahiddin who was killed in 
an encounter on 23.02.2004 at village Kanjikola, Yaripora. He deposed that, thereupon these separatist leaders 
instigated the common people against the sovereignty and integrity of the nation by delivering hate speeches for 
boycotting the general elections and has also raised anti-national slogans and the said hate speeches were designed to 
create hatred among the local people for the Union of India and the Government of Jammu and Kashmir. He deposed 
that the investigation in this case was impeded on account of adverse situations prevalent in Jammu and Kashmir. 
However, at present, the investigation is at an advanced stage and the charge-sheet is expected to be filed shortly. He 
deposed that statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the aforesaid 
incident. 


93. He deposed that FIR No. 192/2014 under Sections 153/341/147 of Ranbir Penal Code and under Section 13 of 
the UAPA was registered on 29.08.2014 in respect of an incident which took place on 29.08.2014 wherein Shabir 
Ahmad Shah along with other separatist leaders came on the road outside Ziyarat Shareef Syed Simnan Sahib, 
Kulgam and after stopping the vehicle movement raised anti-national slogans like “Hum Kya Chahtay Azadi” etc. and 
had also instigated the general public against the State and Central Government and provoked them for not 
participating in the General Elections. He deposed that during investigation, statements of witnesses were recorded 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident. He deposed that after the situation become 
conducive in the Valley, based on the credible material collected against the accused persons establishing their role in 
the incident, a charge-sheet (Ex.PW-9/5A) has been filed on 29.09.2023 in the court of CJM, Kulgam 


94. He has relied upon the certified true copies of the FIR Nos. 33/2004 and 192/2014 and the charge-sheet filed 
pursuant to FIR No. 192/2014, copy of the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., which have 
been exhibited as Ex. PW-9/1 to PW-9/15 and its true English translated copies thereof, have also been exhibited as 
Ex.PW-9/1A to PW-9/15A in the present proceedings. 


95. He further deposed that statement made in his affidavit is based upon a perusal of the record of the investigation 
of the aforesaid FIR No(s). 33/2004 and 192/2014 as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of 
discharge of his official duties and that his statement is on the basis of the records maintained in his district. He lastly 
deposed that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to 
prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


96. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-10 


97. Syed Al-Tahir Gilani (PW-10) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-10/A and deposed that he is posted as a Senior 
Superintendent of Police at Budgam, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer of the FIR No.33/2004, FIR No.110/2014, 
FIR No.132/2011 and also FIR No.39/2015. He deposed that vide order no. DMS/GBD/144-CRPC/358-365/14 dated 
24.4.2014, Syed Ali Shah Geelani, chairman of Hurriyat (G), who was a prominent separatist organization actively 
working in the Kashmir Valley with prime object of secession of Kashmir from Union of India, was kept under house 
arrest. However, on 11.06.2014, in defiance of the said order, Shabir Ahmad Shah, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Bashir 
Ahmad Bhat @ Pir Saifullah and Mohd. Akbar Khanday @ Ayaz Akbar, all separatist leaders of Hurriyat (G), 
gathered at the house of Syed Ali Shah Geelani at Hyderpora, Srinagar and held a conference in commemoration of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


the martyrs of 2010 and after holding said illegal conference, all these separatist leaders came out at Hyderpora 
Chowk in the form of unlawful assembly, prevented the police from discharging their legitimate duties and stopped 
the traffic movement and raised slogans against the sovereignty and unity of India. 


98. He deposed that leading to the said incident, FIR Nos.110/2014 under Sections 147/341/353 of Ranbir Penal 
Code and under Section 13 of the UAPA was registered on 11.06.2014 at P.S. Budgam against these separatist 
leaders. He deposed that due to adverse situations developed in the Kashmir Valley, investigation could not be 
concluded and is now at its final stage. He deposed that during investigation, statements of witnesses were recorded 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. 


99. He deposed that FIR No.132/2011 under Sections 147/336 of Ranbir Penal Code was registered on 09.09.2011 
at P.S. Charari Sharief, Budgam against Shabir Ahmad Shah, chairman of JKDFP and his associates namely, Mudasir 
Ahmad Wani, Muzaffar Ahmad Sheikh and others, who arrived outside Charari Sharief (a prominent shrine) and at 
the instigation of Shabir Ahmad Shah, pelted stones on the police nafri posted there. He deposed that Shabir Ahmad 
Shah was arrested in the case and during investigation statements of witnesses were recorded under Section 161 
Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident. He deposed that after the situation became conducive in the Valley, 
based on the material collected, a charge-sheet was filed on 26.12.2019 in the court of JMIC, Chadora. During the 
investigation one of the co-accused, Muzaffar Ahmad Sheikh was found to be juvenile and hence a charge-sheet was 
filed against him on 26.12.2019 before the Juvenile Justice Board, Budgam. 


100. He deposed that FIR No.39/2015 under Sections 147/148/336/341 of the Ranbir Penal Code and under Section 
13 of the UAPA at P.S. Magam was registered on 21.4.2015, when Shabir Ahmad Shah along with Zafar Akbar Bhat 
and Nayeem Ahmad Khan visited Narbal for paying condolence to the family of deceased Suhail Ahmad Sofi and 
instigated the general public by raising anti-India and pro-Pakistan slogans, which resulted into public going violent 
and starting pelting stones against the police and CRPF personnel. He deposed that at the instigation of above said 
leaders, the gathering converted into an unlawful assembly and had also blocked the Narbal-Gulmarg road for traffic. 
He deposed that some of the accused persons were arrested in the case and during investigation, statement of the 
witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was recorded, who corroborated the above incident. He deposed that based on the 
material collected, a charge-sheet (Ex.PW-10/6A) was filed on 03.11.2022 in the court of Judicial Magistrate 17 Class, 
Magam, Budgam. 


101. He has relied upon the certified true copies of FIR No.110/2014, FIR No.132/2011 and FIR No.39/2015 along 
with their English version of translated copies as also the statements recorded in the aforesaid cases which have been 
exhibited as Ex. PW-10/1A to PW-10/16A in the present proceedings. 


102. He deposed that from the investigation of aforesaid FIRs, it is evident that JKDFP and its chairman Shabir Shah 
have been promoting the cession or secession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the territory of India and have 
been inciting individuals and people of the State of Jammu and Kashmir to bring about such cession or secession. He 
deposed that the acts of omission and commission which have emerged during the investigation of the aforesaid FIRs 
clearly demonstrates that the said acts are intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. He 
further deposed that the investigation in the aforesaid cases reveals the activities of JKDFP, which justify its banning. 
He deposed that his statement before the Tribunal and the affidavit tendered in evidence is on the basis of the records 
maintained in his district and are based on the investigations made in the aforesaid FIRs as also on the basis of the 
knowledge of the activities of JKDFP as derived by him during the course of discharge of his official functions in 
different capacities. 


103. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-11 


104. Mohammed Rafee Rather (PW-11) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-11/A and deposed that he is posted as a 
Deputy Superintendent of Police at Kupwara, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer of the FIR No.86/2004, which 
was registered under Sections 132/132B of the Representation of Peoples Act was registered at P.S. Kupwara against 
accused Shabir Ahmad Shah, who on 16.04.2004 after culmination of the Friday prayer at Markazi Jamia Masjid 
Shareef, Kupwara, along with his party associates, delivered a speech to general public instigating them to boycott the 
elections and raised anti-national slogans. He deposed that due to the disruptive activities carried out by JKDFP in 
active connivance with other separatist/foreign/local terrorist organizations, investigation in the case could not 
proceed. He deposed that during investigation, statement of eye witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., 
who corroborated the above incident and that on the basis of statement of eye witnesses, one poster in Urdu language 
was seized from the spot which was issued by JKDFP, Paraypora office for instigating the people for boycotting the 
elections and the seizure memo is exhibited as (Ex.PW-11/6A). He deposed that when the conditions in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir became conducive, the investigations of the case got completed and charge-sheet (Ex.PW-11/2A) 
was filed on 05.03.2020 in the court of Munsif Judge, Kupwara. He deposed that from the investigation of FIR 
No.86/2004, it is manifest that the JKDFP and its chairman Shabir Ahmad Shah have been incessantly and actively 
advocating secession of the territory of Jammu and Kashmir from India. He has relied upon the certified true copies of 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the FIR No.86/2004 along with its English translation as also copies of the charge sheet filed pursuant thereto, 
statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., copy of the seizure memos, which have been exhibited as 
Ex. PW-11/1A to PW-11/6A in the present proceedings. 


105. He further deposed that the acts of commission and omission which are the subject matter of FIR No.86/2004, 
clearly demonstrates that the activities of the concerned organization and its chairman are primarily designed to 
disrupt the territorial integrity of India and the said organization and its chairman has been inciting the individuals and 
groups to promote anti-national and separatist sentiments, which are designed to jeopardize the integrity and the 
security of the country. He lastly deposed that he has drawn these conclusions primarily based on the investigations 
made in this case and also on the basis of knowledge of the activities of this organization as derived during the course 
of discharge of his official functions. 


106. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-12 


107. Ms. P.D. Nitya (PW-12) tendered her affidavit as Ex.PW-12/A and deposed that she is posted as a Senior 
Superintendent of Police, Pulwama, Kashmir and is the Supervisory Officer of and has gone through the records of the 
case files of FIR Nos.142/2001, 16/2010, 86/2014 and 288/2015. She has deposed with regard to these FIRs as under: - 


- FIR No.142/2001 under Sections 147/149/353/332/336 of Ranbir Penal Code was registered at P.S. 
Pulwama in respect of an incident which took place on 18.05.2001 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah, chairman 
of JKDFP along with other separatist leaders proceeded towards Main Chowk, Pulwama and chanted anti- 
government slogans, pelted stones upon the police, attacked the police officials and physically assaulted the 
SHO, PS Pulwama and the said hate speeches were designed to bring about such cession and secession and 
intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. She deposed that investigation of the 
case was commenced, however, due to adverse situations developed in the Valley, the investigation could 
not reach its logical conclusion. She deposed that statement of the witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was 
recorded, who corroborated the above incident. 


- FIR No.16/2010 under Section 153-A of the Ranbir Penal Code was registered at P.S. Pulwama in respect 
of an incident which took place on 29.01.2010 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah appeared at village Kalampora, 
where a noted militant namely Mushtaq Ahmad Mir was eliminated by the forces on 23.01.2010 and 
delivered hate speech and provoked the general public against the Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir 
and security forces. He deposed that statement of the witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was recorded, 
who corroborated the above incident. She deposed that upon the situation turned conducive in the Valley, 
based on the credible material collected against accused persons establishing his role in the incident, a 
charge-sheet (Ex.PW-12/11A) has been filed under Section 147/153-A of RPC. 


- FIR No. 86/2014 under Sections 505(2) of the Ranbir Penal Code and under Section 123(2)(1) of the 
Representative of Peoples Act was registered on 21.4.2014 at P.S. Pulwama in respect of an incident which 
took place on 21.04.2014 when some unknown persons were affixing posters on electric pole near Jama 
Masjid, Hakripora calling for election boycott by All Party Hurriyat Conference and Shabir Shah 
party/JKDFP. On the basis of the statements of the witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C., a suspect namely 
Owais Maqbool was taken into custody, who during investigation disclosed that he obtained the election 
posters for pasting them in the vicinity. He further disclosed that he pasted two posters at electric pole and 
concealed few at his cowshed. He deposed that upon this disclosure and his pointing, 05 posters published 
by Syed Ali Shah Geelani, chairman of AIHC were recovered and seized and a seizure memo (Ex.PW- 
12/24A) was prepared. He deposed that upon the situation becoming conducive in the Valley, based on the 
credible material collected against accused persons establishing their role in the incident, a charge-sheet 
(Ex. PW-12/17A) has been filed against Shabir Ahmad Shah and the case has been abated against accused 
Syed Ali Shah Geelani, who passed away before filing of the challan. 


- FIR No.288/2015 under Sections 148/149/336/427/332/307 of the Ranbir Penal Code and under Section 13 
of the UAPA was registered at P.S. Pulwama on 11.09.2015, in respect of an incident which took place on 
11.09.2015 at Rajpora Chowk, Pulwama, wherein Shabir Shah addressed a large gathering and instigated 
them against the sovereignty of the Union of India and love/affection for Pakistan due to which the 
gathering turned violent with a clear intent to kill by pelting stones on the police. Statement of the witnesses 
were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident. He deposed that upon 
situation becoming conducive in the Valley and on the basis of the credible material collected against 
accused persons establishing their role in the incident, a charge-sheet (Ex.PW-12/28-A) has been filed 
against accused Shabir Ahmad Shah. 


108. She has relied upon the certified copy/English translations of the FIR Nos. 142/2001, 16/2010, 86/2014 and 
288/2015, charge-sheets filed in FIR Nos.16/2010, 86/2014 and 288/2015, copy of seizure memos, and copy of the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 31 


statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-12/1A to PW- 
12/31A in the present proceedings. 


109. She further deposed that the statement made by her in her affidavit is based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 142/2001, 16/2010, 86/2014 and 288/2015 as also based on the knowledge derived by her 
during the course of discharge of her official duties and that her statement is on the basis of the records maintained in 
her district. She deposed that facts from the above FIRs show that JKDFP and the accused Shabir Ahmad Shah were 
indulging in anti-national activities and were working for secession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the 
Union of India and cession of the Constitution of India and the ban imposed upon the said organization by the Central 
Government is appropriate and needs to be upheld in national interest as well as in the interest of general public. 


110. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-13 


111. Dr. Sumit Sharma (PW-13) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-13/A and deposed that he is posted as a Sub- 
Divisional Police Officer at Kotibagh, Srinagar and is the supervisory officer in respect of FIR Nos.59/2010 and 
10/2014. He has deposed with regard to these FIRs as under:- 


- FIR No.59/2010 was registered on 01.07.2010 at Police Station Maisuma, Srinagar, under Sections 
153A/121 of the Ranbir Penal Code, since during an appearance in Court, Shabir Ahmad Shah, chairman of 
JKDFP interacted with media persons present there and through them he appealed to all the separatist 
leaders to unite and come up with a common minimum program. He further appealed to the general masses 
of Kashmir to follow the said program and condemned the continuance of AFSPA in Kashmir and due to 
this instigation situation in the Valley and especially in the area falling within the jurisdiction of PS 
Maisuma became very tense. He deposed that the statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section 
161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident and a charge-sheet (Ex.PW13/2A) was filed 


- FIR No.10/2014 under Section 13 of the UAPA and under Section 109 of the RPC was registered on 
06.2.2014 at P.S. Kothibagh for an incident which took place on 06.02.2014 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah 
and other leaders gave speech that Govt. of India is occupying Jammu and Kashmir forcefully and holding 
hanging of Mohd. MaqboolBhat and Mohd. Afzal Guroo as unconstitutional and raised slongs ‘Hindustan 
Hai Hai’ Pakistan Zindabad and ‘Hum Kya Chahtay Azadi’. He deposed that due to adverse conditions 
prevailing in the Valley, the investigation could not progress, but now the case is progressing satisfactorily 
and is at its final stage and the charge-sheet in the case is also expected to be filed shortly. 


112. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English translations of the FIR Nos. 59/2010 and 10/2014, charge- 
sheet filed in FIR No.59/2010 and copy of the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and 164- 
A Cr.P.C., which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-13/1A to PW-13/7A in the present proceedings. 


113. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 59/2010 and 10/2014 as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of 
his experience in the Valley in the last 4 years and on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he 
deposed that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to 
prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


114. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-14 


115. Mr. Shahjhan Choudhary (PW-14) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-14/A and deposed that he is posted as a 
Sub-Divisional Police Officer, West Srinagar, and is the Supervisory Officer in respect of FIR No.61/2017, u/s 132(b) 
of the Representation of Peoples Act, which came to be registered on 28.03.2017 at Police Station Parimpora, Srinagar 
for an incident which took place on 28.03.2017 wherein the in-charge of Police Station Qammarwari during patrolling 
duty saw two persons namely Mohd. Yousuf Mir and Faizan Ahmad Malik pasting posters of Democratic Freedom 
Party (a constituent of Hurriyat) for boycotting the Polls. The accused persons informed that they were doing the same 
at the instance of Shabir Ahmad Shah. He deposed that investigation of the case was conducted, the statement of the 
witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., arrest memo and seizure memo was prepared, and the charge- 
sheet (Ex.PW-14/2A) was prepared and filed in the court in the year 2018. He has relied upon the certified true 
copies/English translations of the FIR Nos. 61/2017, charge-sheet filed in FIR No.61/2017 and copies of the statement 
of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-14/1A to PW-14/4A in the 
present proceedings. 


116. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 61/2017 as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


his official duties, since 2017, since when, he had been posted in Srinagar and on the basis of the records maintained 
in his district. Lastly, he deposed that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of 
law and order and to prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


117. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-15 


118. Mr. Ashaq Hussain (PW-15) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-15/A and deposed that he is posted as a Sub- 
Divisional Police Officer, Zakoora, Srinagar, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer in respect of FIR Nos.68/2008 
and 11/2011. He has deposed with regard to these FIRs as under:- 


- FIR No.68/2008 under Sections 147/332/336/427 of the Ranbir Penal Code was registered at Police Station 
Nigeen, Srinagar for an incident which took place on 04.7.2008 on the basis of information received that 
after Friday prayers, an unruly mob led by separatist leaders Shabir Ahmad Shah, Mohd. Ashraf Sehrai and 
Ab. Rasheed Hakeem started pelting stones at public property and when the police tried to stop them, they 
started pelting stones upon the police and other security forces as well. He deposed that investigation of the 
case was conducted and statement of witnesses was recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated 
the above incident, and the charge-sheet/Challan dated 17.12.2023 (Ex.PW-15/2A) was prepared and filed 
in the jurisdictional court on 17.12.2023. 


- FIR No.11/2011 under Sections 147/332/296 of the RPC was registered at Police Station Nigeen for an 
incident which took place on 18.02.2011 wherein Shabir Ahmad Shah and other leaders with a group of 50- 
100 people arrived at the main gate of the Dargah and started raising slogans and pelted stones upon the 
police and other security persons due to which situation of chaos and stampede arose. The security 
personnel apprehended accused persons but Shabir Ahmad Shah escaped taking advantage of the gathering. 
He deposed that investigation of the case was conducted and the statement of the witnesses were recorded 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident, and finally charge-sheet (Ex.15/7A) was 
prepared and filed in the court on 18.12.2023. 


119. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English translations of the FIR Nos. 68/2008 and 11/2011, charge- 
sheets filed in FIR Nos.68/2008 and 11/2011 and copy of the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 
Cr.P.C., which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-15/1A to PW-15/11A in the present proceedings. 


120. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 68/2008 and 11/2011 as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of 
discharge of his official duties and on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he deposed that the 
ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the 
concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against 
the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


121. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-16 


122. Mr. Sajad Ahmad Sheikh (PW-16) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-16/A and deposed that he is posted as an 
Additional Superintendent of Police, Headquarters, Anantnag, Kashmir and is the Supervisory Officer in respect of 
FIR Nos.197/2012, 05/2011, 198/2004, 310/2011, 344/2012, 98/1979 and 97/2010. He has deposed with regard to 
these FIRs as under:- 


- FIR No.197/2012 under Sections 147/148/149/152/336 of the RPC and under Section 13 of the UAPA was 
registered on 19.06.2012 at Police Station Anantnag against accused Quazi Yasir, Sarjan Ahmad Wagay, 
Zahid Ahmad Wagay and other Hurriyat leaders who were carrying out a procession in connection with 
death anniversary of late Qazi Nisar Ahmad at Hanfi Eid Gah Janglat Mandi, Anantnag. They not only 
used slogans against India but also pelted stones on the police personnel. He deposed that due to adverse 
situations in the Valley created by the separatist leaders, supported by terrorist outfits, the investigation, 
though commenced, could not be completed, but now it is at the final stage and the charge-sheet is likely to 
be filed shortly. 


- FIR No.05/2011 under Section 13 of the UAPA was registered on 03.01.2011 at Police Station Anantnag 
against accused Gh. Mohi-din Sheikh and Mohd. YousufMakroo, close associate of Syed Ali Shah Geelani 
for publishing calendars and diaries for the year 2011 in which it was printed that people of Kashmir should 
separate Kashmir from the Union of India. He deposed that during investigation statement of witnesses 
were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident, and finally a charge-sheet 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


(Ex.PW16/8A) was filed on 28.09.2022 before the Special Designated NIA Court, Anantnag against Syed 
Shah Geelani (deceased), Gh. Mohi-din Sheikh and Mohd. Yousuf Makroo. 


- FIR No.198/2004 under Section 132 of the Representation of Peoples Act was registered on 04.05.2004 at 
Police Station Anantnag against accused Hurriyat activists namely, Mr. Shabir Ahmad Shah, Mohd. Yasin 
Malik and Javaid Ahmad Mir for doing a campaign against parliamentary general elections and instigating 
people to completely boycott the said elections. He deposed that statements of the witnesses were recorded 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident. 


- FIR No.310/2011 under Section 153A of RPC was registered on 03.09.2011 at P.S. Anantnag, Kashmir 
against accused Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Quazi Yasir Zaffar Akbar Bhal etc. for delivering a speech to 
people who were offering Namaz at Jamia Masjid, Sherbagh and instigating the general public and youth by 
raising slogans against sovereignty and integrity of India. He deposed that statement of the witnesses were 
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident, and also some accused persons 
were arrested and arrest memo to that effect was also prepared. 


- FIR No.344/2012 under Section 13 of the UAPA and under Section 505 of the RPC was registered on 
04.11.2012 at P.S. Anantnag, Kashmir against separatist leader Saifullah Mir for publishing banner and 
pamphlets at Hurriyat Office which contain message for secession of the State of Jammu & Kashmir from 
the Union of India and cession of the constitution of India. He deposed that upon investigation into the case, 
a charge-sheet (Ex.PW16/31A) has been filed against the accused persons on 02.12.2022 in the NIA Court, 
Anantnag. 


- FIR No.98/1979 under Sections 307/148/336/332/437, 120-B & 149 of the RPC was registered on 
30.03.1979 at Police Station Anantnag against accused Shabir Ahmad Shah for protesting at Lal Chowk, 
Anantnag against hanging of Ex-Pakistan Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who along with his 
associates, marched towards Khanabal and pelted stones on the office of Jamatislamia and damaged army 
vehicle No.JKB-3596. He deposed that during the investigation of the case, damaged vehicle was seized 
and seizure memo was prepared and statement of the witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., 
who corroborated the above incident. 


- FIR No.97/2010 under Section 153 of the RPC was registered on 19.03.2010 at Police Station Anantnag 
against accused Hurriyat leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Peer Said Ud Din, Bashir Ahmad Bhat and Ali 
Mohd. Bhat for provoking general public during Friday prayers by raising anti-India slogans against the 
integrity and sovereignty of India and the State. He deposed that statement of the witnesses were recorded 
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and finally a charge-sheet (Ex.PW16/53A) was filed on 04.07.2023 before the 
Special Mobile Magistrate, Anantnag. 


123. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English translations of the FIR Nos. 197/2012, 05/2011, 198/2004, 
310/2011, 344/2012, 98/1979 and 97/2010, charge-sheets filed in FIR Nos. 05/2011, 344/2012 and 97/2010 and copy 
of the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., copy of arrest memo and seizure memo, as 
mentioned in his affidavit, which have been exhibited as Ex. PW-16/1A to PW-16/58A in the present proceedings. 


124. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit are based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 197/2012, 05/2011, 198/2004, 310/2011, 344/2012, 98/1979 and 97/2010 as also based on 
the knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He further reiterated that Shabir 
Ahmad Shah is one of the prime separatist leader of Jammu and Kashmir since 1980’s and has worked in close 
association with the premiere separatist organization namely Hurriyat Conference, its faction Tehreek-E-Hurriyat 
(which is also recently declared as an unlawful association) and other like-minded separatist organizations and leaders 
well known for doing unlawful activities for achieving their goal of secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union 
of India and cession of Indian Government from Jammu and Kashmir. He further deposed that JKDFP and Shabir 
Ahmad Shah since the formation of JKDFP has worked in close association with premiere separatist leader like Syed 
Ali Shah Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq etc. and their organizations and the JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah worked 
with sole object of secession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of and for the said purposes have 
used unlawful activities and that his statement is on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he 
deposed that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to 
prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


125. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-17 


126. Mr. Syed Yasir Qadri (PW-17) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-17/A and deposed that he is posted as an 
Additional Superintendent of Police, Baramulla, Kashmir and is the supervisory officer in respect of FIR 
Nos.111/2004, 116/2008 and 118/2008. He has deposed with regard to these FIRs as under:- 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


- FIR No.111/2004 under Section 132-B of RP Act was registered on 17.04.2004 at Police Station Baramulla 
against a worker of JKDFP for circulating posters at General Bus Stand, Baramulla wherein it was stated 
that the general public should boycott elections as their participation in the elections will substantiate 
India’s claim of accession over Kashmir as justified and democratic. He further deposed that the said 
posters were published by Shabir Ahmad Shah. He deposed that the investigation of the case was halted for 
a long time owing to prevailing situations in the Jammu and Kashmir and that on 10.4.2009 Shabir Ahmad 
Shah was arrested and his arrest memo (Ex. PW17/14A) was prepared. He deposed that the statement of the 
witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above incident. 


- FIR No.116/2008 under Sections 148/149/121/307/436/332/435/427/511 of the RPC was registered on 
11.08.2008 at Police Station Baramulla against accused Shabir Ahmad Shah and other leaders of JKDFP for 
disrupting lawful activities in the valley of Kashmir by instigating huge mob equipped with lathis and 
stones. The said mob came at the main town of Baramulla with intent to kill the police personnel and 
pelted stones on them. The violent mob also damaged the public buses and tried to demolish the Raghunath 
Temple, building of police station and other Government buildings. He deposed that during investigation 
statement of various witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. & 164 Cr.P.C. (Ex.17/7 & 8A), 
who corroborated the above incident. He deposed that investigation of this case was halted for a long period 
of time, but are now at its final stage and the charge-sheets are likely to be filed shortly. He deposed that 
during investigation, the pelted stones were seized (Seizure memo Ex. PW 17/9A) from the spot and the 
accused Shabir Ahmad Shah was arrested against an arrest memo (Ex. PW 17/10A). 


- FIR No.118/2008 under Section 148/149/452/436 of the RPC was registered on 11.08.2008 at Police 
Station Baramulla against the mob, which, equipped with lathis and stones come out on the road at Delina 
NHW and entered into the workshop namely Irshad Motors at Delina NHW and set on blaze various 
vehicles at the said workshop. Shabir Ahmad Shah was also arrested in the case and an arrest memo was 
prepared for the same. He deposed that upon investigation, name of seven accused persons were surfaced 
who all were arrested and the charge-sheet (Ex.PW 17/12A) was filed before the jurisdictional court. He 
deposed that Shabir Ahmad Shah was also arrested against an arrest memo (Ex.PW 17/13A). 


127. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English translations of the FIR Nos. 111/2004, 116/2008 and 
118/2008, charge-sheet filed in FIR No. 118/2008 and copy of the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 
161 Cr.P.C., copy of arrest memo and seizure memo, as mentioned in his affidavit, which have been exhibited as Ex. 
PW-17/1A to PW-17/14A in the present proceedings. 


128. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit are based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 111/2004, 116/2008 and 118/2008 as also based on the knowledge derived by him during 
the course of discharge of his official duties. He further reiterated that Shabir Ahmad Shah is one of the prime 
separatist leader of Jammu and Kashmir since 1980’s and has worked in close association with the premiere separatist 
organization namely Hurriyat Conference, its faction Tehreek-E-Hurriyat (which is also recently declared as an 
unlawful association) and other like-minded separatist organizations and leaders well known for doing unlawful 
activities for achieving their goal of secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and cession of Indian 
Government from Jammu and Kashmir. He further deposed that JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah since the formation 
of JKDFP has worked in close association with premiere separatist leader like Syed Ali Shah Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar 
Farooq etc. and their organizations and the JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah worked with sole object of secession of 
the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of and for the said purposes have used unlawful activities and that 
his statement is on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he deposed that the ban on the 
organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned 
organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully 
established government and the Union of India. 


129. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-18 


130. Mr. Murtaza Ahmad (PW-18) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-18/A and deposed that he is posted as a 
Deputy Superintendent of Police, CIK, Kashmir and is currently the Investigating Officer with regard to FIR 
Nos.15/1991 and 10/2010. He has deposed with regard to these FIRs as under: - 


- FIR No.15/1991 under Section 153-A/120-B of the RPC and under Section 13 of the ULA(P) Act, was 
registered on 31.10.1991 at Police Station CIK-SIA, Srinagar, Kashmir, against Syed Ali Shah Geelani, 
Shabir Ahmad Shah, Prof. Abdul Gani Bhat and Abdul Ghulam Lone (Ex-MLA) for their conspiring with 
their handlers across the border enemy countries and for the purpose of seceding the State of J&K from the 
Union of India, they have been continuously opposing the policies of the Union of India. Further, these 
leaders instigated the youth of Jammu & Kashmir and were involved in ex-filtrating them to Pakistan for 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


acquiring illegal arms and arm training. These leaders continued their secessionist, anti-national and 
terrorist activities and termed themselves as freedom fighters and called their acts as ‘Jihaad’. The local 
newspapers namely ‘A’-Safa’ and ‘Srinagar Times’ were publishing their interviews and appreciating their 
statements made against the Union of India. These leaders were instrumental behind the turmoil caused in 
the State of Jammu & Kashmir and especially in the Kashmir region from the year 1989 onwards. 


- FIR No.10/2010 under Sections 121A/120B of the RPC and under Sections 13/17/18 of ULA(P) was 
registered at Police Station JI, CIK, Srinagar, Kashmir against the accused persons involved in FIR 
No.15/1991 as during investigation of FIR No.15/1991, in the year 2010, it came to light that the separatist 
leaders involved in the said FIR had amassed huge wealth and raised large number of assets through hawala 
and other illegal channels of money laundering and were using the said monies and assets for promoting 
violence/militancy, spreading secessionist ideology in the State of Jammu and Kashmir and were 
facilitating illegal funding to militant outfits for carrying armed violence for secession of the State of 
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. He deposed that after collecting sufficient material against the 
accused persons proving the offences, a charge-sheet was filed in the case. He deposed that statements of 
various witnesses were also recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated the above facts. 


131. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English translations of the FIR Nos. 15/1991 and 10/2010, copy of 
the statement of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., as mentioned in his affidavit, which are exhibited 
as Ex. PW-18/1A to PW-18/7A in the present proceedings. 


132. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based on a perusal of the record of the 
investigation in FIR Nos. 15/1991 and 10/2010 as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of 
discharge of his official duties. He further reiterated that Shabir Ahmad Shah is one of the prime separatist leader of 
Jammu and Kashmir since 1980’s and has worked in close association with the premiere separatist organization 
namely Hurriyat Conference, its faction Tehreek-E-Hurriyat (which is also recently declared as an unlawful 
association) and other like-minded separatist organizations and leaders well known for doing unlawful activities for 
achieving their goal of secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and cession of Indian Government 
from Jammu and Kashmir. He further deposed that JEKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah since the formation of JKDFP has 
worked in close association with premiere separatist leader like Syed Ali Shah Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq etc. and 
their organizations and the JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah worked with sole object of secession of the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of and for the said purposes have used unlawful activities and that his statement 
is on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he deposed that the ban on the organization is justified 
and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned organization from continuing to 
preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully established government and the 
Union of India. 


133. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-19 


134. Mohd. Ashrif (PW-19) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-19/A and disposed that he is presently working as 
Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Sadder, Srinagar, Kashmir and is the Supervisory Officer in respect of FIR Nos. 
155/1995, 73/1999 and 26/2016. He has deposed as under with regard to these FIRs:- 


- FIR No. 155/1995 under Section 188/148/353/121 of the RPC was registered at Police Station Sadder, 
Srinagar on 09.05.1995, since on that date a written docket was received at the said Police Station from 
SDPO Sadder informing therein that despite Section 144 CrPC imposed in the area, at around 06.30 hours, 
a large procession of people led by Shabir Ahmad Shah and Abdul Gani Lone pelted stones on the 
patrolling party led by SDPO Sadder and also raised anti-national slogans. He deposed that upon 
investigation, statement of witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and other material were 
collected in respect of the accused persons, on the basis of which a charge-sheet (Ex. PW19/2A) was 
prepared and filed in the jurisdictional court against Shabir Ahmad Shah. He deposed that accused Abdul 
Gani Lone died prior to the filing of the charge-sheet. 


- FIR No. 73/1999 under Section 188/147/332/336/427 of the RPC was registered at Police Station Rajbagh 
on the basis of a written docket being received in Police Station Rajbagh informing therein that on 
13.09.1999 at about 1400 hours, the SHO on patrolling duty in Rajbagh received an information that 
workers of JKDFP under the supervision of its chairman, Shabir Ahmad Shah, were proceeding towards Lal 
Mandi and were instigating the general public from loud speakers to avoid the Independence Day 
ceremonies. The violent and unlawfully assembled mob raised objectionable slogans and violated orders 
under Section 144 Cr.P.C., and made the situation tense and uncontrollable. He deposed that during 
investigation statement of various witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated 
the above incident, and thereafter, charge-sheet (Ex.19/4A) was filed against the accused persons. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


- FIR No. 26/2016 under Sections 121/120-B/506 of the RPC and under Sections 13 & 18 of ULA(P) Act 
was registered at Police Station Budshah Colony, Sanatnagar, Srinagar on the basis of an incident against 
JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah which was reported on 29.02.2016, wherein it was informed that on 
22.02.2016 Shabir Ahmad Shah, General Secretary of Hurriyat ‘G’ along with other Hurriyat leaders 
addressed a press conference at his residence in Sanatnagar, Srinagar and requested all the business 
community, traders and shopkeepers to make complete shutdown on 26" and 27" February on account of 
protests held in JNU against the Kashmiri students. He further deposed that, in his speech, Shabir Ahmad 
Shah called Afzal Guru’s execution a judicial killing and threatened the State Government with dire 
consequences in case harm is caused to Syed Ali Shah Geelani. Shabir Ahmad Shah also stated in his 
speech that Jammu & Kashmir is not a part of India and the people should honour mujahedeen who are 
brave hearted and are sacrificing their lives for separating Jammu & Kashmir. He deposed that during 
investigation statements of various witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated 
the above incident, and thereafter, a charge-sheet (Ex.PW19/10A) was filed in the court against Shabir 
Ahmad Shah. He deposed that investigation in the case could not be completed due to adverse situation 
prevailing in the Valley, but after the conducive situation, the investigation progressed satisfactorily and 
charge-sheet was filed. 


135. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English Translation of the FIR Nos. 155/1995, 73/1999 and 26/2016, 
copies of the charge sheets in the said FIRs, and copy of the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the 
Cr.P.C., as mentioned in his affidavit, which have been exhibited as Ex.PW19/1A to Ex.PW19/15A in the present 
proceedings. 


136. He further deposed that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based upon a perusal of the record of the 
investigation of the aforesaid FIR Nos. 155/1995, 73/1999 and 26/2016 as also based on the knowledge derived by 
him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He further reiterated that Shabir Ahmad Shah is one of the 
prime separatist leader of Jammu and Kashmir since 1980’s and has worked in close association with the premiere 
separatist organization namely Hurriyat Conference, its faction Tehreek-E-Hurriyat (which is also recently declared as 
an unlawful association) and other like-minded separatist organizations and leaders well known for doing unlawful 
activities for achieving their goal of secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and cession of Indian 
Government from Jammu and Kashmir. He further deposed that JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah since the formation 
of JKDFP has worked in close association with premiere separatist leaders like Syed Ali Shah Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar 
Farooq etc. and their organizations. He deposed that JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah worked with sole the object of 
secession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of and for the said purposes have used unlawful 
activities, and is on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he deposed that the ban on the 
organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned 
organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully 
established government and the Union of India. 


137. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-20 


138. Fayaz Hussain Geelani (PW-20) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-20/A and deposed that he is presently 
working as Sub-Divisional Police Officer, Shaheed Gunj, Srinagar, Kashmir, and is the supervisory officer in respect 
of FIR Nos. 108/2004, 108/2009 and 157/2009. He has deposed as under with regard to the aforesaid FIRs:- 


- FIR No. 108/2004 under Sections 353/336/427 of the Ranbir Penal Code was registered at Police Station 
Batamaloo, Srinagar on 07.10.2004 on the basis of a written docket received at Police Station Batamaloo 
from the then SHO of P.S. Batamaloo Camp Reck Chowk informing that on the said date during their 
patrolling duty for the elections, he saw separatist leaders namely, Shabir Ahmad Shah, Mohd. Yasin Malik, 
Feroz Ahmad Dar and Mohd. Siddiq Guroo, who all were associated with Hurriyat Party, suddenly 
appeared at Rech Chowk along with other youth of the area and started raising anti-election slogans. When 
the SHO tried to restrain the said people, they became violent and started pelting stones. He deposed that on 
the instigation of Shabir Ahmad Shah and others, the mob pelted stones on the rally of Mst. Shameema 
Begam (leader of Panthers Party) who was going towards Ziyarat Batamaloo. He deposed that during the 
investigation statement of various witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated 
the above incident, and on the basis of the materials collected, charge-sheet (Ex. PW 20/2A) was filed in the 
jurisdictional court on 11.11.2021. He deposed that the broken pieces of glasses and stones were seized 
from the spot and a seizure memo (Ex.PW-20/10A) was prepared. 


- FIR No. 108/2009 under Section 153A of the RPC and under Section 13 of the ULAP Act was registered at 
Police Station Batamaloo on 15.11.2009 on the basis of a complaint that chairman of Muslim League, 
Mushtaq Ahmad Bhat along with other activists of Hurriyat including Shabir Ahmad Shah, Nayeem Khan, 
Shakeel Bakshi, Zaffar Bhat and others were delivering speech at Kashi Mohalla and were provoking 
general public to indulge in anti-national activities and to promote secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 37 


Union of India, as also spread hatred amongst the people against India. He deposed that during 
investigation, statement of various witnesses were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., who corroborated 
the above incident. 


- FIR No. 157/2009 under Section 120/120-B/121/153-A of the Ranbir Penal Code and under Section 13 of 
ULA (P) Act was registered at Police Station Shaheed Gunj, Srinagar on the basis of anti-India speeches 
and slogans delivered by prominent separatist leaders on 30.12.2009 in a seminar conducted by Feroz 
Ahmad Khan, Vice-Chairman of Muslim League in the memory of late Mohammed Ali Jinnah. All the 
separatist leaders present there stressed that there should be Islamic law in Jammu & Kashmir and the 
future of Kashmir depends only upon Pakistan. He deposed that the investigation in this case could not be 
concluded due to adverse situation created in the Valley by the separatist leaders, but now due to conducive 
situation, the investigation is at its final stage and the charge-sheet in the case is also expected to be filed 
shortly. 


139. He has relied upon the certified true copies/English translated copies of the FIR Nos. 108/2004, 108/2009 and 
157/2009, copy of the charge sheet in FIR No. 108/2004, copy of the statement of witnesses recorded under Section 
161 of the Cr.P.C., copy of seizure memo, as mentioned in his affidavit, which have been exhibited as Ex.PW 20/1A 
to Ex.PW 20/19A in the present proceedings. 


140. He submitted that the statement made by him in his affidavit is based upon a perusal of the record of the 
investigation of the aforesaid FIR Nos. 108/2004, 108/2009 and 157/2009 as also based on the knowledge derived by 
him during the course of discharge of his official duties. He reiterated that Shabir AhmadShah is one the prime 
separatist leader of Jammu and Kashmir since 1980’s and has worked in close association with the premiere separatist 
organization namely Hurriyat Conference, its faction Tehreek-E-Hurriyat (which is also recently declared as an 
unlawful association) and other likeminded separatist organizations and leaders well known for doing unlawful 
activities for achieving their goal of secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India and cession of Indian 
Government from Jammu and Kashmir. He further deposed that JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah since the formation 
of JKDFP has worked in close association with premiere separatist leader like Syed Ali Shah Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar 
Farooq etc. and their organizations. He further deposed that JKDFP and Shabir AhmadShah worked with sole object 
of secession of the State of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of and for the said purposes have used unlawful 
activities and is on the basis of the records maintained in his district. Lastly, he deposed that the ban on the 
organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and to prevent the concerned 
organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully 
established government and the Union of India. 


141. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-21 


142. Mr. Mayank Arora (PW-21) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-21/A and deposed that he is working as an 
Assistant Director in the Enforcement Directorate, Delhi Zonal Office — I, New Delhi and is fully conversant with the 
facts of the case based upon his knowledge derived from the relevant records of the case. He deposed that he is duly 
authorized by the Joint Director, Enforcement Directorate, Delhi Zonal Office — II, New Delhi to depose before this 
Tribunal by letter dated 07.03.2024, copy of which was kept on record. 


143. He deposed that the FIR No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI (Ex.PW-21/1) was registered on 30.5.2017 by the National 
Investigation Agency (NIA in short), under Sections 120B, 121 and 121A of the IPC, 1860 read with Section 13, 16, 
17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), 1967 against Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, 
members / cadres of Hurriyat Conference, Hizb-ul-Mujahidden (HM), DukhtaraneMillat, Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) and 
other proscribed terrorist organizations / associations / gangs, other secessionist and separatist leaders, hawala 
operators and LoC traders for acting in connivance with active militants for raising, receiving and collecting funds 
domestically and abroad through various illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist 
activities in Jammu and Kashmir; and through the fund so collected, they entered into a larger criminal conspiracy for 
causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by way of pelting stones on the security forces, systematically burning of 
schools, damaged public property and waged war against India. 


144. He deposed that the NIA filed a Charge-Sheet No.01 of 2018 dated 18.01.2018 under Sections 173(2) Cr.P.C. in 
FIR No.RC/10/2017/NIA/DLI before the Special Judge for NIA cases, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi. 
Subsequently, NIA filed first supplementary charge-sheet No.01 A of 2018 dated 22.01.2019 under Section 173(2) 
Cr.P.C. for the offences under Sections 120B, 121 & 121A of the IPC read with Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 
40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. Subsequently, a second supplementary charge-sheet No.01 B of 
2019 on 04.10.2019 (Ex. PW-21/2) was filed by NIA under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C. for offences under Sections 120B, 
121 & 121A of the IPC read with Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the UAPA, 1967. 


145. He deposed that the investigation conducted by the NIA reveals that various terrorist organizations viz. Jammu 
Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtarane Millat, LeT, in connivance with All Party 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Hurriyat Conference (APHC) and its constituents were funded by Pakistan and its agencies and terror groups and 
entered into a criminal conspiracy to wage war against the Government of India. The Hurriyat leaders and their 
supporters were following the ideology of ‘freedom’ i.e. secession of the State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union 
of India. Hurriyat Conference and its factions Tahreek-E-Hurriyat were recently declared as an unlawful association 
by the Central Government. 


146. He deposed that All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC), which was formed in 1993 as a conglomerate of 26 
political / social / religious organizations, serves as a front for secessionist activities, supported by Pakistan. APHC 
orchestrated violence in Kashmir, including strikes and stone-pelting with an aim to further its agenda of separation of 
Kashmir from India thereby constituting a criminal conspiracy. Shabir Ahmad Shah @ Shabir Shah, chairman of 
JKDFP, which was formed on 24.5.1998, was an active constituent of APHC and has been one of the frontline 
secessionist entities pursuing the agenda of securing secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India since 
its formation. He made inflammatory speeches at several places in J&K instigating the masses for secession of J&K 
from the Union of India. He was in touch with Pakistan and POK based terrorist’s leadership including Syed 
Salahuddin, Chairman of HM and United Jihad Counsel, Hafiz MohdSaeed (Chief of JuD/LeT) and all these facts 
have already been brought out in the charge-sheet filed on behalf of the NIA including the supplementary charge-sheet 
referred to as aforesaid. 


147. He deposed that enquiries were initiated under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA), 2002 against 
the accused persons after taking note of the scheduled offence in ECIR No.03/DLZO-I/2017 dated 14.06.2017 (EX 
PW- 21/3). The investigation revealed that Shabir Ahmad Shah S/o Ghulam Mohd. Shah along with other accused 
persons, played a key role in building the separatist / militant movement in J&K and was one of its chief architects. 
Accused Shabir Ahmad Shah was duly supported by the Pakistani agencies through the Hurriyat representatives such 
a Shafi Shair and Mehmood Sagar based in Pakistan. Shabir Ahmad Shah was continuously in contact with the 
Pakistan based entities and he had received money through Hawala from these persons. 


148. He deposed that during the investigation and scrutiny of the pointing cum recovery memo dated 08.6.2019 (EX. 
PW-21/4), relied upon by the NIA as AD-120 in the second supplementary charge sheet dated 04.10.2019, it was 
revealed that Shabir Shah was maintaining and using an email bearing ID shabirashah @rediffmail.com. A perusal of 
the emails received on the said mail (relied upon by the NIA as AD-120/43 in the second supplementary charge sheet 
dated 04.10.2019), revealed that he was receiving funds from overseas which was corroborated by email dated 
20.01.2015 received on his email ID from shafi_shair@hotmail.com. The said mail contained details of funds 
distributed in US Dollars and Indian currency, establishing ShafiShair as a Hurriyat representative based in Pakistan. 
The said email is at page 160 of his affidavit and reads as under:- 


‘Subject: THANX 


From: shair shafi <shafi_shair@hetmail:com>-an ६७, 20 (1 2: 


४.3 30 pest 


To: shabir shah <shabirashah@rediffmail:com> 


anes ae tel el | i ene A in a ea ee ae 


Asalamoalikum, 

dard] zail 18558 hal... 
4, 25000= US 

32. 20000= 

3. 15090= 

4. 50000= 

5, 2000060= IND 

6. 1200000=IND 

7, QURBANI..... 


APP NAY JOO LIYA 
25000 US 


45000 US 
2000000 IND ISS: 10175 ) PAPAS 1५४77 ४०४ | 002 HAT 
ABI APP NAY 50 ७३ KA KU ah LIYAHATABQI 8 INSHALL/ 

2AM ALAWA...SAFQAT KA 1 

IR SAHIB 50 

118॥10२/ KAY 40 
AUR 5 ae 
BAQI INSHALIAH JALDEE HOGA 


149. He deposed that he recorded the statement dated 24.08.2022 of Shabir Ahmad Shah under Section 50 of PMLA, 
2002 (EX. PW 21/5) and Shabir Shah acknowledged to him his association with Shafi Shair since 1993. The CDRs of 
Shabir Shah revealed that he had received several calls on his mobile number from Mohd. Shafi Shair from his 
Pakistani number during the period from 22.01.2017 to 26.01.2017. On being confronted with the aforesaid email 
dated 20.01.2015, Shabir Shah refused to explain the content of the said mail, thus, he could not discharge the burden 
of proof under Section 24 of the PMLA, 2002 with respect to the incriminating email received from Shafi Shair dated 
20.01.2015 describing the distribution of funds in USD and INR to various persons, including himself. 


150. He deposed that Shabir Shah was also receiving funds from Pakistan through Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (a 
Kashmir based businessman, who was a Hawala conduit), which fact was substantiated by the documents seized from 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


the house of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat, the accountant-cum-cashier of accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali during the 
search conducted by NIA on 16.08.2017. The document shows Shabir Shah having received an amount of Rs.10 lakhs 
on 29.04.2015 from Hawala conduit Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. The said document is at page 159 of his affidavit 
(Ex.PW-21/6) and reads as under:- 


padre ?' | 44 


e nit Foreign Contributions and expenditures 2015/2016 
» 3° 
33.2015  2,50,000 AED Mudassir Wani 3 
83.2015 10,00,000 Masrat Alam 
7.42015 15,00,000 Rs Yasin Malik 
29.4.2015 —10,00,000 Rs Shabir Shah 


35.2015 —3,00,000 AED Tariq Shafi 
(From Hafeez Saeed) 


6.7.2015 5,00,000 Rs Haj exp 

20.7.2015 25,00,000 Rs Geelani Sb 

30.8.2015 10,00,000 Rs Personal (Dubai visit) 
Altaf Fantoosh 

13.9.2015 15,00,000'Rs (Geelani Sb) 

21.11.2015 5,00,000 Rs Shagufta 

2016 


153.2016 30,00,000Rs HOP 


10.4.2016 10,00,000 Rs personal 
17.6.2016 12,00,000 Rs Advocate Shafi Rishi 
16.6.2016 15,00,000 Rs Naseem Geelani 


20.10.2016 40,00,000 Rs Iqbal Cheema HCP 


21.11,2016 20,00,000 Rs Geelani Sb 


151. He deposed that he himself had recorded the statement of Shabir Ahmad Shah under Section 50 of PMLA, 2002 
on 24.08.2022, who affirmed his association with Zahoor Ahmad Watali (Hawala conduit) since 2009-10. Since he 
offered no comments when confronted with the said document, reflecting his having received Rs.10 lakhs from 
Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, he could not discharge the burden of proof under Section 24 of the PMLA, 2002 with 
respect to incriminating documents seized from the house of Ghulam Mohd. Bhat during the search by NIA which 
showed foreign contributions received from Hafiz Saeed, Pakistan High Commission and others and did not give any 
explanation regarding receipt of funds and its utilization by him. 


152. He deposed that the bail application of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali was cancelled by the Supreme Court vide 
judgment/order dated 02.04.2019 reported as (2019) 5 SCC 1. 


153. He deposed that from the investigation under PMLA, it is evident that the Pakistani Government sent an amount 
of Rs.1.10 crores to Shabir Ahmad Shah to be distributed amongst those who had resorted to stone pelting on the 
security forces in J & K and who were then injured in the security forces action. This clearly shows that Shabir Shah 
along with other accused persons was at the centre of the conspiracy to promote lawlessness and violence in J & K 
perpetuated with an intention to secure secession of J & K from the Union of India. 


154. He deposed that Shabir Shah had received funds to the tune of Rs.1.20 crores, which qualifies as ‘proceeds of 
crime’ in terms of Section 2(i)(u) of the PMLA, 2002, from Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali and from Pakistani 
authorities for distributing amongst stone pelters and to promote lawlessness and violence in J & K. The said proceeds 
of crime were dissipated by Shabir Ahmad Shah for terrorist and secessionist activities. Thus, in terms of Section 
2(1)(u) of PMLA, 2002 property belonging to Shabir Ahmad Shah situated at H.No. 179, Survey No. 838 min adm. 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


12.5 marlas in Botshah Colony, Sanat Nagar, PS Barzulla, Srinagar, valued at around Rs.21.8 lakhs at the time of 
registration of FIR by NIA ie. 30.5.2017, constituted property equivalent in value to a part of proceeds of crime and 
hence, the said property qualified to be proceeds of crime in terms of Section 2(i)(u) of PMLA, 2002. The said 
property was attached vide Provisional Attachment Order (PAO) bearing No.13/2022 dated 03.11.2022 issued u/s 5 
(1) of the PMLA, 2002 (Ex. PW-21/7). The Original Compliant (OC) bearing No.1845/2022 dated 30.11.2022 was 
filed before the learned adjudicating authority, New Delhi u/s 5(5) of the PMLA, 2002 and the provisional attachment 
order was confirmed vide order dated 26.04.2023 (Ex.PW21/8). 


155. He deposed that a supplementary prosecution complaint arraigning Shabir Shah, head of JKDFP as accused was 
filed on 09.01.2023 before the Special Judge (PMLA), Patiala House Courts, New Delhi (Ex. PW 21/9); cognizance 
on the same was taken on 10.01.2023 and the matter is listed for framing of charges and the main PC in the case was 
filed on 24.08.2020. 


156. He deposed that the accused Shabir Ahmad Shah and his party JKDFP has been indulging in anti-national 
activities, hence, declaration of JKDFP as unlawful association by the Central Government of India is legally justified 
and is required to be upheld in the public interest so as to curb and curtain illegal and unlawful activities of JKDFP. 


157. He has relied upon the certified true copies of the FIR No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI dated 30.05.2017; the first and 
second supplementary charge-sheets dated 22.01.2019 and 04.10.2019; the scheduled offence in the ECIR 
No.03/DLZO-II/2017 dated 14.6.2017; statement of Shabir Shah dated 24.8.2022; the seizure memo dated NIL; the 
Provisional Attachment Order No.13/2022 dated 03.11.2022; the confirmation order of the provisional attachment 
order dated 26.4.2023 and the supplementary prosecution complaint dated 09.01.2023 arraigning Shabir Shah as an 
accused, as mentioned in his affidavit, which have been exhibited as Ex.PW21/1 to Ex.PW21/9 in the present 
proceedings. 


158. He deposed that the statement made by him hereinabove is based upon a perusal of the record of the 
investigation of the above cases as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of discharge of his 
official duties and his statement is on the basis of the records maintained with the Enforcement Directorate. He has 
lastly deposed that the ban on the organization is justified and is necessary to prevent disruption of law and order and 
to prevent the concerned organization from continuing to preach disaffection, disloyalty and feelings of enmity and 
hatred against the lawfully established government and the Union of India. 


159. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


PW-22 


160. Mr. B. B. Pathak (PW-22) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-22/A and deposed that he is serving as Deputy 
Superintendent of Police in National Investigation Agency (NIA), New Delhi and is fully conversant with the facts of 
the case based upon his knowledge derived from the relevant records of the case. He tendered his affidavit in evidence 
as Ex.PW-22/A affirmed on 26.02.2024. The said affidavit has been drafted on his instructions and each page of the 
affidavit has been signed by him and duly notarized. 


161. He deposed that NIA, being India’s Federal Counter Terrorism Investigation Agency, was directed by order 
No.11011/2017-IS-IV dated 30.05.2017 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), to register a regular case and 
take up the investigation as credible information was received by the Central Government that Hafiz Muhammad 
Saeed, Amir of Jammat-ud-Dawah and the secessionist and separatist leaders, including the members/cadres of the 
Hurriyat Conference, have been acting in connivance with active militants of terrorist organization viz. Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and other terrorist organizations/associations/gangs for 
raising, receiving and collecting funds domestically and abroad through various illegal channels, including hawala, for 
funding separatist and terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir by way of pelting stones on the security forces, 
systematically burning of schools, damaging public property and waging war against India. 


162. He deposed that the NIA registered a case being RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI under Sections 120B, 121, 121A of the 
IPC and Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (Ex. PW-22/1); 
and the investigation into the case revealed that various terrorist organizations viz. Jammu & Kashmir Liberation 
Front (JKLF), Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), LeT, in connivance with various secessionist groups particularly the All 
Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC/Hurriyat Conference) and its constituents were funded by Pakistan and its 
agencies and terror groups had entered into a criminal conspiracy to wage war against the Government of India. The 
Hurriyat leaders and their supporters were following the ideology of ‘freedom’ 1.6. secession of the State of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Union of India. 


163. He deposed that he is the chief investigation officer in respect of the said case since 15.12.2023 and had also 
personally participated in the searches that were conducted at the initial stage of the investigation. 


164. He deposed that the investigation revealed that APHC was formed as a conglomerate of 26 political/social/ 
religious organizations in 1993 to give a political mask to the secessionist activities. This alliance has been 
consistently promoted and supported by Pakistan to fulfil its evil motive and establish its claim over the State of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 41 


Jammu & Kashmir. However, the real agenda of APHC was to create a conducive atmosphere to fulfil their goal i.e. 
secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. He deposed that the investigation has further revealed that 
APHC had entered into a criminal conspiracy and engaged in instigating the gullible general public of Kashmir for 
taking arms and to take part in violent activities to create a surcharged atmosphere in the valley, which is conducive 
for propagation of their secessionist agenda. The APHC has repeatedly asked the people to observe strikes on various 
non-existent issues and instigated them to get involved in unlawful activities such as stone-pelting, burning of public 
properties etc. He deposed that the motive behind the disturbances caused by the frequent strikes and the stone-pelting 
incidents was to create such circumstances which will lead to the secession of the State of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India. The secessionist agenda of the Hurriyat was also mentioned in its website 
www.huriyatconference.com, which speaks about “Freedom struggle” and that “People of Jammu & Kashmir have 
been fighting against Indian Occupation”. 


165. He deposed that pursuant to the investigation carried out by the NIA, Charge Sheet dated 18.01.2018 (Ex. PW- 
22/2) was filed before the Special Court, NIA, New Delhi against 12 accused persons, including two designated 
terrorists, based in Pakistan, namely Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, who is the Head of banned terrorist organization ‘LeT’, 
Mohd. Yusuf Shah @ Salahuddin, Head of banned terrorist organization ‘HM’, as absconders. The said Charge Sheet 
also included other arrested accused persons, who are the leaders of APHC viz. Aftab Ahmad Shah@ Shahid-ul- 
Islam, Altaf Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh, Nayeem Ahmad Khan Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate, Mohammad 
Akbar Khanday, Raja MehrajuddinKalwal, Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifullah, one accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali involved in providing funds for terrorists and secessionist activities and two were involved in stone pelting in 
Kashmir Valley, under Sections 120B, 121, 121A & 124A of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 
38, 39 & 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. The case was further being investigated in terms of 
Section 173 (8) of Cr.P.C. 


166. He deposed that the aforesaid charge-sheet takes note of the extent of the secessionist and terrorist activities in 
Jammu and Kashmir as stated in para 17.2.1 therein. Further, the charge-sheet also refers to the role of Hurriyat in the 
conspiracy/ secessionist agenda. The contents of the charge-sheet shows that the magnitude of the secessionist and 
terrorist activities is attributable to the Hurriyat. He has made a specific reference to para 17.2 and 17.3 of the said 
charge-sheet. The facts stated therein shows the hostile environment which prevailed in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir. 


167. He deposed that during the course of further investigation, it was revealed that Shabir Ahmad Shah, head of 
JKDFP along with other accused persons played a key role in building the separatist/militant movement in Jammu and 
Kashmir. 


168. He deposed that on 26.02.2019 and 27.02.2019, nine (09) premises belonging to the separatists, the accused 
persons arraigned in the case and Shabir Ahmad Shah @ Shabir Shah were searched in Jammu and Kashmir, and 
electronic items were seized (Ex. PW-22/3). The seized electronic devices were sent to Centre for Development of 
Advanced Computing (“C-DAC") Trivandrum for analysis and expert opinion. Several incriminating videos have 
been extracted from the seized digital devices by the experts of C-DAC (Ex. PW-22/4). The said incriminating videos 
have been submitted in a pen drive to the Registrar of this Tribunal which has been exhibited as (Ex.PW-22/6A). 


169. He deposed that during investigation accused Shabir Ahmad Shah, being a part of the conspiracy related to the 
secessionist and terrorist activities in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, was arrested on 04.06.2019 against an arrest 
memo (Ex.PW-22/6). The investigation revealed that JKDFP was formed on 24.05.1998 and Shabir Ahmad Shah @ 
Shabir Shah became its chairman. It has further been revealed that JKDFP was an active constituent of APHC. JKDFP 
has been one of the frontline secessionist entities which is pursuing the agenda of securing secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Union of India since its formation. He deposed that Shabir Ahmad Shah had made inflammatory 
speeches at several places in Jammu & Kashmir instigating the masses for secession of Jammu & Kashmir from 
Union of India to create a surcharged atmosphere against the Government of India. 


170. He deposed that Shabir Ahmad Shah was in constant contact with Pakistan and POK based terrorists’ leadership 
including Syed Salahuddin, Chairman of HM and United Jihad Counsel), Hafiz MohdSaeed (Chief of JuD/LeT) and 
used to pay tributes to the killed militants and on his directions delegation of his party viz. JKDFP, that is the banned 
organization, used to visit family members of slain terrorists. He deposed that the investigation revealed that Shabir 
Ahmad Shah remained frequently in touch with Pakistan based entities and received money from them through 
Hawala channels and also used to share the details of killed militants to Pakistan based entities. Further, Shabir 
Ahmad Shah, being the head of JKDFP, was involved in the conspiracy of insurgency and funding for unrest in 
Jammu & Kashmir and was also inciting people to hold protests, Hartals and complete shut-downs. He deposed that 
he was involved in raising funds through donations from Kashmiris and also received funds from Pakistan through 
Hawala which was used for unlawful activities such as stone pelting on security forces and creating unrest in the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir. As such, Shabir Ahmad Shah played a key role in building the separatist and militant 
movement in Jammu & Kashmir. 


171. He deposed that during investigation several witnesses were examined and their statements have been recorded 
under section 161 Cr.P.C (Ex. PW-22/7 & 22/8); a perusal of which would reveal the active role of Shabir Ahmad 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Shah played in building the separatist and militant movement in Jammu and Kashmir. He further deposed that further, 
the statement of the protected witnesses (i.e. Alpha, John, X45 and X46) in terms of the Section 44 of the UAPA, have 
also been annexed along with his affidavit (Ex.PW-22/9). 


172. He deposed that Shabir Ahmad Shah vide his disclosure statement dated 08.06.2019 (Ex.PW-22/11) stated that 
he had joined APHC as an executive member in 1994, however, he quit APHC and started the organization sought to 
be banned viz. JKDFP. He further confessed that he remained associated with other separatist leaders in planning and 
propagating secessionist movement in Kashmir and also promoting anti India feelings in the population of Kashmir 
using different social platforms i.e. Email, Facebook and Twitter. He deposed that Shabir Shah also stated that if he 
was given access to his email account, face-book and twitter IDs, he could show mails, messages and other data. In 
continuation of this disclosure statement, he was given access to a computer and internet connection; pursuant thereto 
data from his email account i.e. shabirashah @rediffmail.com was recovered and seized (Ex.PW-22/12) wherefrom it 
has been established that Shabir Shah was in frequent touch with Shafi Shair and Mehmood Sagar, Hurriyat 
representatives based in Pakistan and would receive money through Hawala from these persons. 


173. He deposed that investigation has further revealed that Shabir Shah was receiving funds from Pakistan through 
some conduits, which is substantiated by the document seized from the house of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat, the 
accountant-cum-cashier of co-accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. A copy of the seizure memo is exhibited as 
(Ex.PW-22/13). He deposed that based on the evidence on record, the 271 Supplementary Charge-Sheet was filed on 
04.10.2019 against five accused persons namely Mohd. Yasin Malik, head of JKLF, an unlawful association, Shabir 
Ahmad Shah, Head of JKDFP, Masarat Alam Bhat, Secretary of Muslim League, Syeda Aasiya Andrabi, head of 
terrorist organization Dukhtaran-e-Millat (DeM) and Abdul Rashid Sheikh, Chairman of Awami Ittehadi Party u/s 
120B, 121, 121A & 124A IPC and Section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of UA(P) Act, in the NIA Special Court, 
Patiala House Courts, New Delhi. Copy of the 2"! Supplementary Charge sheet dated 04.10.2019 is exhibited as (Ex. 
PW-22/14). 


174. He deposed that the charges have been framed against accused Shabir Ahmad Shah vide Court order dated 
16.03.2022 for the offences under Sections 120B, 121, 121A of IPC and Section 13 UAPA r/w Section 120B of IPC, 
Section 15 of UAPA r/w 120B of IPC, Sections 17, 18 & 20 of UA(P) Act. Copy of the Charge Order dated 
16.03.2022 passed by the Ld. Special Judge, NIA, New Delhi is also enclosed and exhibited as (Ex. PW-22/15). He 
deposed that the accused Yasin Malik, head of JKLF had pleaded guilty, following which he was convicted of all the 
charges levelled against him and was, thus sentenced with rigorous imprisonment for life and fine of Rs. 10 lakhs and 
the trial qua the other accused persons is still underway and is pending adjudication and is now listed on 06.04.2024 
and 08.04.2024 for examination of prosecution witnesses. 


175. He deposed that from the cogent and irrefutable evidence on record, the evidence adduced by the witnesses, 
inter alia the FIRs registered along with subsequent charge-sheets and the examination-in-chief of the witnesses filed 
before this Tribunal, it is clear that the JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah have been actively and continuously 
encouraging a veiled armed insurgency at the behest and on instructions from Pakistan and POK based terrorist 
organizations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a secession of territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir from the territory of India; besides causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by 
promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and its members are indulging and acting in a 
manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India; and as such the decision of the Central 
Government to declare the JKDFP as unlawful association is just, proper and bona fide. 


176. He has relied upon the certified true copies of the Seizure Memo dated 26.02.2019; Scrutiny Report of Articles 
seized from the residence of Shabir Shah; Forensic Report received from C-DAC vide No. CDAC/CSG/L 19-71 dated 
13.03.2019; Arrest Memo dated 04.06.2019; statements of the Prosecution Witness viz. Mohd. Rajak and Mohd. 
Aslam Wani; statements of the protected witnesses (in terms of Section 44 of UAPA) code named as Alpha, John, X45 
and X 46 (in sealed cover for perusal of the Tribunal only); Disclosure statement dated 08.06.2019; pointing cum 
recovery memo; Seizure Memo dated 16.08.2017, Letter dated 11.09.2019, and ED letters, the pen drive containing 
incriminating videos, Charge-sheets filed in the NIA case, and Charge Order dated 16.03.2022, as mentioned in his 
affidavit, which have been exhibited as Ex.PW22/1 to Ex.PW22/16 in the present proceedings. 


177. He lastly deposed that the statement made by him is based upon a perusal of the record of the investigation of 
the above cases as also based on the knowledge derived by him during the course of investigation done by himself; 
and further that the investigation in the present case is on-going and as such his knowledge is on the basis of the facts 
uncovered during the course of investigation that he has carried out by himself. 


178. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 
PW-23 


179. Mr. Dharmender Kumar (PW-23) tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW-23/A and disposed that he is presently 
posted as a Deputy Secretary in the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New Delhi, and is duly 
authorized by the Ministry of Home Affairs to depose before this Tribunal. The relevant copy of the office noting 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 43 


which incorporates the authorization in his favour has been handed over to the Registrar of this Tribunal. A copy of 
the relevant noting authorizing him to move an application for claiming privilege against the disclosure of confidential 
documents (duly sealed) referred to in his affidavit, has also been handed over to the Registrar of this Tribunal. The 
said office noting specifically records that the satisfaction of the Union Home Secretary (Head of the Department) has 
been arrived at in respect of the claim for privilege/confidentiality. 


180. He deposed that he tendered his affidavit in evidence as Ex.PW-23/A affirmed on 07.03.2024 and the said 
affidavit has been drafted on his instructions on the basis of his knowledge as derived from the official records and 
each page of the affidavit has been signed by him and duly notarized. 


181. He deposed that he has been dealing with all the relevant files/records pertaining to JKDFP i.e. the said banned 
organization in his official capacity, even prior to the issuance of notification No. 8.0. 4348 (E) dated 05.10.2023. He 
deposed that the said files/records were perused by him on account of being posted in Counter-terrorism and Counter- 
radicalisation Division in the Ministry of Home Affairs. 


182. He deposed that the notification No. 8.0. 4348 (E) dated 05.10.2023 (Ex.PW-23/1) issued by the Central 
Government is based on the information and material received from central intelligence agency(ies) and criminal 
investigation department of the Govt. of UT of Jammu & Kashmir with regard to the unlawful activities of the 
JKDFP, and the said information and material demonstrates the unlawful activities of Jammu and Kashmir 
Democratic Freedom Party (JKDFP). 


183. He deposed that on the basis of the aforesaid information, a note was prepared for the consideration of the 
Cabinet Committee on Security. The said note was prepared by him in consultation with senior officers and the draft 
notification and the said note was prepared after the requisite consideration at various levels and taking into account 
the relevant facts and circumstances, including internal security implications. He deposed that the above position is 
reflected in the official record of the Ministry of Home Affairs and he has personally perused the said record, and has 
deposed on the basis thereof. 


184. He deposed that the Cabinet Committee on Security, in the meeting held on 04.10.2023 approved the proposal 
contained in the aforesaid Cabinet note and, consequently, the declaration was made and published in the official 
gazette dated 05.10.2023. He deposed that vide Notification dated 23.10.2023 bearing 8.0. 4639 (E), in terms of sub- 
section (1) of Section 5 r/w sub-section (1) of Section 4 of the UAPA, this Tribunal was constituted. He deposed that 
the background note submitted to this Tribunal in terms of Rule 5 of the UAP Rules 1968 vide letter dated 03.11.2023 
(Ex. PW-23/2), is based upon the material / information as contained in the concerned files. 


185. He deposed that various cases registered by the Jammu and Kashmir Police, National Investigation Agency 
(NIA) and the Enforcement Directorate (ED) throw light on the unlawful and subversive activities of the chairman and 
members of JKDFP. He deposed that affidavits have been filed before this Tribunal by the concerned officers of the 
UT of Jammu & Kashmir, against the chairman and members of JKDFP bringing out the illegal activities of the 
association, which also contravene various provisions of the law including the UAPA and Ranbir Penal Code etc; and 
further that the affidavits which have been filed before this Tribunal by the concerned officers of the NIA and the ED 
bring out the activities of the chairman of JKDFP and of the JKDFP itself, and the various offences committed under 
various sections of the UAPA, IPC and PMLA. 


186. He deposed that evidence adduced by various witnesses in support of declaration contained in notification 
No.4348 (E) dated 05.10.2023 clearly establishes that JKDFP is continuously indulging in unlawful activities and 
poses a serious threat to the internal security and sovereignty of the country. He deposed that various intelligence 
inputs clearly bring out the unlawful activities of JKDFP and the fact that JKDFP is continuously indulging in 
activities of separation of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India; and that banning of JKDFP is necessary in the 
interest of national security, sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. He deposed that the statement made by him 
in para 10 of his affidavit is based both on the inputs received from the various intelligence agencies as also based on 
the evidence of various witnesses who have deposed before this Tribunal. He deposed that the original file (duly 
indexed) containing above mentioned intelligence reports/inputs are being submitted in a sealed cover for the perusal 
of this Tribunal and the contents thereof are privileged and confidential in nature, hence, cannot be made available to 
the banned association or to any third party. It is in respect of this information and for claiming 
privilege/confidentiality with regard thereto, that a separate application has also been filed, with the prior approval of 
the Union Home Secretary. 


187. During the recording of statement of PW-23/A, following question was specifically put by learned counsel for 
the Union of India, and answered by him as under:- 


Question by learned counsel for the Union of India:- As regards status of investigations of various FIRs 
registered by the Jammu and Kashmir Police, what is the cause of delay in investigation of the said cases? 


Ans.- Because of the hostile environment in the State of Jammu and Kashmir and due to insurgency by the 
terrorist organizations who acted in connivance and support of separatist organizations, it was not conducive for 
the investigating agencies to carry out a fair and expeditious investigation and it is only after coming into force 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of the Jammu and Kashmir Re-organisation Act, 2019, that the environment has become conducive for 
investigation to proceed faster and to expedite the process of trial. The details of the facts/situation regarding 
hostile environment already forms part of the charge-sheet filed by the NIA at para 17. 


188. He deposed that from the cogent and irrefutable evidences which have come on record, JKDFP is continuously 
encouraging a veiled armed insurgency and openly inciting people to bring about secession of the part of territory of 
India from the Union; and further that activities of JKDFP is aiming at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis- 
harmony by promoting feeling of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and continuously pursuing the 
agenda of securing secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India by inciting and orchestrating violence. 
He lastly deposed that if the JKDFP is not banned, the activists and sympathizers of JKDFP will pose a serious threat 
to the communal harmony, internal security and integrity of the country. Hence, the declaration made by the Central 
Government vide Notification No.4348 (E) dated 05.10.2023 may please be confirmed and upheld both in the public 
interest and national interest. 


189. Opportunity for cross-examination was given, but not availed in view of non-appearance on the part of the 
assocation. 


VIII. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 


190. On 13.03.2024 the matter was fixed for hearing. On the said date, learned Additional Solicitor General for the 
Union of India, while arguing for claiming privilege for producing documents in sealed cover, has referred to Section 
123 of the Evidence Act read with Section 3(2) of the UAP Rules, 1968, which are reproduced as under:- 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


“123. Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from 
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the 
head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.” 


The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.- 


(1) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any application under 
sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (6) of section §, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as 
the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the 
rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), where any 
books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the Court of the 
District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other documents are 
claimed by that Government to be of a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the Court of the 
District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, - 


(a) Make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 


(b) Allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 
account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings before 
it.” 

191. Learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the claim of privilege by the Union of India for the 
documents placed is made as the documents are of such a nature that the non-disclosure of which would be in the 
interest of the public. It was submitted that this concept of public interest is taken into account even in the criminal 
proceedings qua the accused, whereas in juxtaposition, the present matter stands at a much higher pedestal and 
involves the issue of sovereignty and integrity of the country. Learned ASG submitted that the cases concerning 
national security, sovereignty and integrity, the tribunal has to interpret and analyze the material differently as the 
decisions taken by the Central Government in such manner are based on highly sensitive information and inputs; and 
the effects of such decisions are not confined to the boundaries of the nation; and, in fact, in the present scenario when 
the terrorist activities and national insurgency is on rise, the global boundaries have become meaningless. 


192. To support her arguments, learned ASG has relied upon the judgment in a case of preventive detention in Raj 
Kumar Singh vs. State of Bihar (1986) 4 SCC 407; where the Supreme Court, inter alia, held as under:- 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public order. But the 
court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate authority acts on proper 
materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even though a conclusion with which the 
court might not be in agreement. It is not for the court to put itself in the position of the detaining authority and 
to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path of crime provided these facts are relevant. See in this 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


connection the observations of O. Chinnappa Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case [(1984) 3 SCC 14: 1984 
SCC (Cri) 361: AIR 1984 SC 1334: (1984) 3 SCR 435 ] at p. 440 and 441. (SCC p. 19, para 1) 346. Similarly, 
in the case of Union of India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (2017) 2 SCC 599: 2016 SCC Online SC 1468.. It was 
not for the court in the exercise of its power of judicial review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The 
formulation of suggestions by the High Court for framing a National Security Policy travelled far beyond 
legitimate domain of judicial review. Formulation of such a policy is based on information and inputs which are 
not available to the court. The court is not an expert in such matters. Judicial review is concerned with the 
legality of executive action and the court can interfere only where there is a breach of law or a violation of the 
Constitution.” 


193. The learned ASG has also placed reliance upon the judgment in Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. 
Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as under: 


“15. It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the same would generally 
include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and strength, ecological balance, 
cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 


16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. It is not for the 
court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It should be left to the executive.” 


194. The learned ASG submitted that the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a mechanism to claim 
privilege and withhold certain facts/documents to seek non-disclosure of the same. The learned ASG then placed 
reliance on the judgment in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under:- 


"19. ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central Government to withhold the 
disclosure of acts which it considers to be against the public interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the 
proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 also permit nondisclosure of confidential 
documents and information which the Government considers against the public interest to disclose... 


20... 


21. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in nature 
and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued confidentiality in public 
interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, and, may be, also full particulars 
thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated 
by the Rules framed thereunder provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 


22....in such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or 
its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the association or its office-bearers, 
but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for 
the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. 
In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the 
credibility of such material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause 
for declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the 
Strict sense. 


23.03% 


24. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in public 
interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential information for the 
purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of the other side. This modified 
procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic element of an 
adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action taken." 


195. The learned ASG also relied on the judgment in People’s Union for Civil Liberties vs. Union of India, (2004) 2 
SCC 476, where it was, inter alia, held as under: 


“69. The legislative policy behind the aforementioned provisions is no longer res integra. The State must have 
the prerogative of preventing evidence being given on matters that would be contrary to public interest. 


70. For determining a question when a claim of privilege is made, the Court is required to pose the following 
questions: 


(1) whether the document in respect of which privilege is claimed, is really a document (unpublished) 
relating to any affairs of State; and 


(2) whether disclosure of the contents of the document would be against public interest? 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


71. When any claim of privilege is made by the State in respect of any document, the question whether the 
document belongs to the privileged class has first to be decided by the court. The court cannot hold an enquiry 
into the possible injury to public interest which may result from the disclosure of the document in question. The 
claim of immunity and privilege has to be based on public interest. 


72. The section does not say who is to decide the preliminary question viz. whether the document is one that 
relates to any affairs of State, or how it is to be decided, but the clue in respect thereof can be found in 
Section 162. Under Section 162 a person summoned to produce a document is bound to —bring it to the court, 
notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production or to its admissibility. The validity of any 
such objection shall be decided on by the courtl. It further says that: —The court, if it seems fit, may inspect the 
document, unless it refers to matters of State, or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility 


73. In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished State documents, the documents must relate to 
affairs of the State and disclosure thereof must be against interest of the State or public interest.” 


196. The learned ASG, thus, submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court, it is 
clear that an enquiry contemplated under the UAPA gives a right to the government to claim privilege of sensitive 
documents in public interest/national interest and in the interest of justice; which right has been duly upheld by the 
Supreme Court; and that in the present case, the documents for which claim of privilege, by their very nature, are 
confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document. 


197. The learned ASG further submitted that the document forms part of the evidence collected by the intelligence 
agencies which pertains to secessionist and unlawful activities of the JKDFP and those associated with it and the said 
documents are confidential and secret in nature and the same can be verified by the Tribunal only. The learned ASG 
further submitted that the nature of material placed in the sealed cover by the Central Government is in the form of 
intelligence reports, secret information collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence agencies, 
communications between the intelligence agencies, information which may lead to further recoveries, discoveries of 
facts as also unearth conspiracies, the disclosure whereof would be clearly detrimental to the larger public interest and 
the security of the State. The learned ASG submitted that the material filed by the Central Government contains the 
note then put up to the Cabinet Committee on Security along with documents supporting the note and the grounds on 
which the notification was issued besides intelligence inputs and correspondence in relation thereto. Hence the claim 
of privilege of the documents by the Central Government is in accordance with law and the documents submitted in 
sealed cover are not required to be disclosed in the public interest. 


198. Learned ASG further submitted that the sealed cover material as mentioned in the affidavit of the Union of 
India, forms part of the evidence which is inherently and dehors being part of the evidence of the present proceeding is 
of confidential nature, disclosure of which would be contrary, not only to the public interest but also to national 
interest and the interest of justice. In the same breath, the learned ASG submitted that the privilege of the said 
documents is claimed based on the nature of documents which impinge upon national security. The disclosure of these 
documents to the other side would jeopardize not only the interest and safety of certain individuals but would also 
compromise national security. 


199. Learned ASG has also placed reliance in this regard on the following judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court:- 
(a) Dr. George Mathew Vs. UOI (1997) 10 SCC 537 
(b) R.K. Jain Vs. UOI (1993) 4 SCC 119 
(c) W.N. Chadha Vs. Union of India (1993) Supp (4) SCC 260 
(d) Doypack Systems Vs. UOI (1988) 2 SCC 299 
(e) S.P. Gupta Vs. Union of India (1981) Supp SCC 87 
(f) State of U.P. Vs. Raj Narain (1975) 4 SCC 428 


200. Learned ASG has submitted that with regard to the claim of privilege for non-disclosure of sealed documents, 
the Supreme Court in S.P. Gupta (supra), has held as under: 


“73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection to the disclosure of a document under Section 
123 is raised, two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely, whether the document relates to 
affairs of State and whether its disclosure would, in the particular case before the court, be injurious to public 
interest. The court in reaching its decision on these two questions has to balance two competing aspects of 
public interest, because the document being one relating to affairs of State, its disclosure would cause some 
injury to the interest of the State or the proper functioning of the public service and on the other hand if it is not 
disclosed, the nondisclosure would thwart the administration of justice by keeping back from the court a 
material document. There are two aspects of public interest clashing with each other out of which the court has 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


to decide which predominates. The approach to this problem is admirably set out in a passage from the 
judgment of Lord Reid in Conway v. Rimmer [(1968) AC 910, 952, 973, 979, 987, 993 : (1968) 1 All ER 874 
(HL)] : 


“It is universally recognized that there are two kinds of public interest which may clash. There is the public 
interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the public service by disclosure of certain documents, 
and there is the public interest that the administration of justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of 
documents which must be produced if justice is to be done. There are many cases where the nature of the 
injury which would or might be done to the nation or the public service is of so grave a character that no 
other interest, public or private, can be allowed to prevail over it. With regard to such cases it would be 
proper to say, as Lord Simon did, that to order production of the document in question would put the 
interest of the State in jeopardy. But there are many other cases where the possible injury to the public 
service is much less and there one would think that it would be proper to balance the public interests 
involved.” 


201. Learned ASG, therefore, submitted that the rigors of $.P Gupta (supra) for claiming privilege have to be read in 
context of the provisions of UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder which provide that document, disclosure whereof 
may not be in the public interest, be not disclosed. She further submitted that the UAP Rules, as quoted above, starts 
with a non obstante clause and thus an inbuilt mechanism has been provided under the UAPA and the Rules framed 
thereunder. Accordingly, the Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege forbidding disclosure where the claim of the 
Government is that the disclosure of such documents could affect the larger public interest of the nation by 
jeopardizing the safety and sovereignty of the country and also finds that the public interest outweighs the interest of 
the association/members/office bearers. 


202. Learned ASG submitted that the claim of confidentiality has to satisfy on the test of character of the document 
and if on an objective satisfaction it is concluded that the document is of such a character that its disclosure will injure 
public interest, the contents thereof cannot be permitted to be disclosed to the other side. Thus, the foundation of 
immunity from non-disclosure stems from the character of the document and an act of balancing public interest 
against the interest of the individual, the office bearer or the association which has been banned, has to be carried out 
by the Tribunal. 


203. The learned ASG submitted that the statement of objects and reasons of the UAPA itself underlines the purpose 
of the enactment to provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and 
associations and for matters connected therewith. She submitted that the statute empowers the Parliament to impose 
by a due process of law reasonable restrictions in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India on the right to form 
an association and incidentally a restriction on the freedom of speech and expression, to assemble peacefully and with 
arms. UAPA being a special statute, the procedure provided therein necessarily prevails on the general provisions of 
law. Learned ASG submitted that, further Section 48 of the UAPA itself provides that the provisions of the UAPA and 
the Rules made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
enactment other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of an enactment other than this Act giving a 
clear over-riding position. 


204. The learned ASG also submitted that the decision of the previous Tribunals constituted under Section 4 of the 
UAPA, in which the claim of privilege by the Central Government had been allowed holding that the same satisfied 
the requirement of Section 123 of the Evidence Act, are binding on this Tribunal in view of the provisions of Section 
5(7) of the UAPA which provide that the proceedings before this Tribunal are judicial proceedings and, therefore, 
reliance has been placed on the Extraordinary Gazette Notification bearing no CG-DL-E-27032023-244721 published 
in PART IIl—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) having No. 1382 dated MONDAY, MARCH 27, 2023/CHAITRA 6, 1945 
whereby, Tribunal comprising of Hon'ble Mr Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma, Judge, Delhi High Court in exercise of 
the powers conferred by sub-Section (3) of section 4 of the said Act, passed an order on the 21st March, 2023, 
confirming the declaration made by Central Government declaring the Popular Front of India (PFI) and its associates 
or affiliates or fronts including Rehab India Foundation (RIF), Campus Front of India (CFI), All India Imams Council 
(AIIC), National Confederation of Human Rights Organization (NCHRO), National Women‘s Front, Junior Front, 
Empower India Foundation and Rehab Foundation, Kerala as an unlawful association vide notification of the 
Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 4559 (E), dated the 27th September, 2022 
(hereinafter referred to as the said notification), published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part I, Section 3, 
Sub-section (ii) dated the 28th September, 2022. 


205. In view of the aforesaid position, the learned ASG submitted that the Central Government respectfully claims 
privilege on the documents contained in the sealed cover, as mentioned in the affidavit filed by the Central 
Government. 


206. The Tribunal posed a question to the learned ASG as to what is the difference between the ‘unlawful activity’ & 
‘unlawful association’ and the ‘terrorist activity’ & the “terrorist organization’. To this, learned ASG submitted that 
the wisdom of Parliament to create two species of offences i.e. ‘unlawful activity’ & ‘unlawful association’ and 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


‘terrorist activity’ & terrorist organization’ cannot be questioned. She submitted that the validity of the provisions of 
the Act ought to be judged in the backdrop of the history of the Act necessitating their introduction. Learned ASG 
submitted that as per the Statement of Objects and Reasons, the Unlawful Activities (Preventive) Act, 1963 was 
enacted to make powers available for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India 
which may take the manner and form either of “terrorism” or “other unlawful activity” that threatens the sovereignty 
of India. 


207. Learned ASG further submitted that the exception to the freedom of speech and expression, and to form 
associations and union, under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India, was inserted in the form of “sovereignty and 
integrity of India” in Article 19(2) and 19(4), after the National Integration Council appointed a Committee on 
National Integration and Regionalization. The said Committee was to look into the aspect of putting reasonable 
restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Learned ASG submitted that pursuant to the 
acceptance of recommendations of the Committee, the Constitutional Sixteenth Amendment) Act 1963 was enacted to 
impose reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Further, in order to implement 
the provisions of the 1963 Act, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in the Parliament. The main 
objective of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is to make powers available for dealing with activities directed 
against the integrity and sovereignty of India. 


208. Learned ASG submitted that after Independence of India, Parliament of India has passed many laws to regulate 
national security and in order to protect sovereignty of India. The UAPA, 1967 is an Act to provide for the more 
effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for dealing with terrorist 
activities and other matters connected therewith. Learned ASG submitted that the present Act is the Central Act and 
has been amended time and again to tackle the menace of terrorism and terrorist activities from India. 


209. Learned ASG further submitted that to achieve the aforesaid purpose of tackling the menace of activities 
inimical to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the legislature in its wisdom decided to create two species of the 
offence i.e. 


i. Unlawful Activity & Unlawful Association [S-2(0) r/w Chapter 2 & 3 (Sections 3-14)]; and 
ii. Terrorist Act & Terrorist Organization [S-2(k), (1),(m) r/w Chapter 4-6 (Sections 15-40)]. 


210. Learned ASG further submitted that the growing threat of terrorism posed immediate harm to the lives of the 
Indian citizens and the security of the State led to the enactments of special deterrent laws from time to time. Learned 
ASG submitted that notably, the repeal of the Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act, 2002 entailed an absence of a 
legal framework to address the menace of terrorism. Accordingly, as a consequence, the UAPA was amended to 
include a definition of the term 'terrorism' and to give substantive powers to the Indian State to address the same. The 
amendments made therein were made also keeping in mind India's commitments under the Security Council 
Resolution dated 28th September, 2001, which enjoined to fight both terrorism as well as terror funding, which was to 
be treated as a genus of terrorism. The amendments were in furtherance of the global fight against terrorism. 


211. In view of the aforesaid, learned ASG submitted that it is evident that the provisions of UAPA have been 
enacted by the Parliament which had the legislative competence to enact the same and that once it is clear that the 
Parliament had the legislative competence to enact the law, there is a presumption of constitutionality in favour of the 
statute. It is further submitted that there is always presumption of constitutional validity of the statute and it is 
presumed that the Legislature understands the needs of the people. Learned ASG submitted that an organization can 
be banned solely based on the opinion of the Central Government and, therefore, the challenge to Chapter IT of UAPA 
has already been repelled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in para 84 -92 of Arup Bhuyanv v. State of Assam (2023) 8 
SCC 745. In para 90 of this judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:- 


“90. Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared unlawful a detailed 
procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity and even the right to a member of such 
association to represent before the Tribunal. As observed hereinabove the notification issued by the Central 
Government declaring a particular association unlawful, the same is subject to inquiry and approval by the 
Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and despite that a person who is a member of such unlawful 
association continues to be a member of such unlawful association then he has to face the consequences and is 
subjected to the penal provisions as provided under Section 10 more particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 
1967.” 


212. Learned ASG submitted that from the aforesaid discussion of the Supreme Court, it is clear that an organization 
can be banned solely on the basis of the opinion of the Central Government and through the process duly established 
by the law enacted by the Parliament. 


213. Part-heard arguments were heard on behalf of the Union of India and the matter was fixed for final arguments 
on 14.03.2024. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 49 


214. On 14.03.2024, learned ASG for the Union of India submitted that the proceedings before this Tribunal are civil 
in nature and the standard of proof is the standard prescribed by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) 
and the matter has to be decided by objectively examining which version is more acceptable and credible. In this 
regard, learned ASG has referred to the observation made in para 30 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). Learned ASG 
also argued that the procedure to be followed by the Tribunals can be read from the law enacted under the 
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. Learned ASG then submitted that similarly the Tribunal established under the 
UAPA has been bestowed with certain powers and the procedure to be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 
9 of the said Act. 


215. Learned ASG has submitted that as per the mandate of Section 4 of the UAPA, the jurisdiction of this Tribunal 
is to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause available with the Central Government to ban the organization 
in question. Learned ASG has submitted that any procedural irregularities or defects in material adduced before this 
Tribunal are to be tested by the concerned trial court within the parameters of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and other 
relevant laws. Learned ASG further submitted that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to satisfy itself whether these 
documents can be relied upon to ascertain ‘sufficiency of cause’ and whether the agencies responsible for the 
enforcement of law and order could or could not have ignored the same for recommending suitable action under the 
UAPA. 


216. Learned ASG has submitted that for the purpose of assessing the sufficiency of the cause, this Tribunal has to 
holistically look into the entire materials / incidents and if the material / incidents are relatable acts of commission of 
unlawful activity, secession or ‘cession of a part of the territory of India’ on the anvil of preponderance of probability, 
then the ban is justified and is required to be confirmed. Learned ASG submitted that the Central Government has led 
sufficient and cogent material and evidence to demonstrate that there was sufficient material available with the Central 
Government to form an opinion that JKDFP and its associates were indulging in unlawful activities. Learned ASG 
submitted that the law does not require that the cases which should form the basis of opinion formed by the Central 
Government should not be proximate to the date of the decision or there should be ‘X’ number of cases to prove an 
association to be an unlawful association; and that even one case may be sufficient. Learned ASG has submitted that 
the delay in the investigation will have no bearing in the present proceedings as the degree of evidence required before 
this Tribunal and the adjudication thereon is to be based on the principles of preponderance of probabilities. 


217. Learned ASG has further submitted that the evidence adduced by the Central Government has not been refuted 
on any ground whatsoever, and as such, in view of non-rebuttal of the evidence adduced by the Central Government 
by any member / erstwhile member of JKDFP opposing the ban, the Notification No. 8.0. (E) 4348 published in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 5 October, 2023, declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom 
Party (JKDFP) as an ‘unlawful association’ under sub-Section (1) of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Act, 1967 is liable to be confirmed. 


218. As regards the hostile environment prevailing in the territory of Jammu & Kashmir creating hurdles in 
conclusion of cases against the separatist and militants, the learned ASG submitted that as has been stated in the 
testimonies of various witnesses, the delay in the investigation and trial has occurred due to extremely hostile 
environment which prevailed in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir. Learned ASG submitted that it is a matter 
of public knowledge that since last more than three decades, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir has been 
adversely affected by the acts and deeds of the Separatist groups and its leaders. 


219. Learned ASG submitted that from 1989 to 2016 the situation in the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir 
remained volatile and disturbed due to the circumstances created by terrorist groups camouflaged as Separatist 
Groups/Political Parties or self-styled political leaders who instigated and provoked the general public at large against 
the lawfully established governments with the help of foreign state and non-state actors having interests inimical to the 
interest of the country. Learned ASG has submitted that these facts have been referred to in the concurring opinion of 
Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul in para-31 and Epilogue recorded in para 113-135 in the judgment Re: Article 370 of the 
Constitution, reported in 2023 INSC 1058 : 2023 SCC Online SC 1647. 


220. Learned ASG submitted that the separatist leaders and their activists had created such terror in the minds of 
public that the general public, which even did not support their cause, feared to oppose them or to report to the police 
against various incidents and even feared to depose or give evidence against the said separatist leaders. Thus, leading 
to a non-cooperative atmosphere for the police investigating agencies in the cases registered against the said separatist 
organizations or its leaders. 


221. Learned ASG also submitted that the investigation was further slowed thereafter due to COVID-19 Pandemic 
which had brought all the routine activities to a standstill and a complete lockdown in the entire nation was imposed, 
hence, the investigation in the cases registered against the JKDFP and Shabir Ahmad Shah in the State of Jammu & 
Kashmir could not be processed at the pace it should have been. 


222. Learned ASG has also submitted that the NIA in its charge-sheet filed on 18.01.2018 in RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI 
vide paragraphs 17.2. to 17.5 has highlighted the magnitude of secessionist and terrorist activities in the Kashmir 
valley and the nexus of JKDFP and cross border terrorist organizations in the Kashmir valley and that the 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


investigation carried out by the NIA, therefore, corroborates the hostile environment in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir for a long period of time which could not let the Investigating Agency to complete the investigations in 
respective FIRs. 


223. The learned ASG submitted that a bare perusal of the facts stated in the NIA charge-sheet read with the facts 
stated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Re: Article 370 of the Constitution (supra), it can be clearly inferred 
that prior to coming into force the Jammu & Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 2019, the various successive governments 
/ authorities from 2004 to 2019 for the reasons recorded in the judgment of the Supreme Court did not take any stern 
action against the separatists. Learned ASG submitted that the said authorities rather than concentrating on 
prosecuting the criminal acts of separatist and secessionist forces, indulged in dialogue. Learned ASG submitted that 
it appears that due to such non-conducive and hostile environment the investigations / prosecutions could not reach to 
their logical conclusions, which are not taken up with a sense of urgency and seriousness post coming into force the 
Jammu and Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 2019. 


224. Learned ASG submitted that despite several FIRs having been lodged against Shabir Ahmad Shah and other 
members of JKDFP, its members / activists / sympathizers are still active and are indulging in unlawful activities as 
defined in the UAPA and are indulging in anti-national activities posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, peace, communal harmony, internal security and maintenance of secular fabric of the Indian society. 
Learned ASG has submitted that if the JKDFP is not banned again, the activists and sympathizers of JKDFP will 
again pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, internal security and integrity of the country. 


225. Lastly, learned ASG has submitted that the notification No. S.O. 4348 (E); dated October 5", 2023, issued by 
the Central Government declaring JKDFP as an unlawful association is based on the information and material 
received from the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir, the National Investigation Agency, Directorate of 
Enforcement and the various intelligence agencies, with regard to the unlawful activities of the JKDFP and is liable to 
be confirmed. 


IX. APPLICATION FILED BY THE UNION OF INDIA CLAIMING PRIVILEGE 
226. The Union of India has filed an application claiming privilege, where, it has been inter alia averred as under :- 


“1. The above-mentioned matter is pending consideration before this Hon’ble Tribunal. That the Union of 
India through Ministry of Home Affairs has filed a detailed affidavit and the contents of the Affidavit are not 
repeated herein for the sake of brevity and may be read as part and parcel of the present application. 


2. The Central Government is constrained to file the present application to seek privilege to the documents 
mentioned in para-11 of the said affidavit. The Central Government places its claims of privilege to the 
document under Section 123 of Evidence Act read with Section 3(2) of The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) 
Rules, 1968.... 


XXX XXX XXX 


5. In the present case, it is respectfully submitted that the documents for which claim of privilege, by their very 
nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be supplied as a public document. 


6. It is submitted that the documents forms part of the evidence collected by the intelligence agencies which 
pertains to secessionist and unlawful activities of the JKDFP and those associated with it. The said documents 
are confidential and secret in nature and the same can be verified by the Hon’ble Tribunal only. 


7. It is further respectfully submitted that the contents of the sealed cover documents are privileged and 
confidential in nature and Government considers it against the public interest to disclose the same to either the 
unlawful association or to any third party inter-alia in terms of the provisions of the UAPA. 


&. The nature of material placed in the sealed cover by the Central Government is in the form of intelligence 
reports, secret information collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence agencies, 
communications between the intelligence agencies, information which may lead to further recoveries, 
discoveries of facts as also unearth conspiracies, the disclosure whereof would be clearly detrimental to the 
larger public interest and the security of the State. The material filed by the Central Government contains the 
note put up to the Cabinet committee on Security along with documents supporting the note and the grounds on 
which the notification was issued besides intelligence inputs and correspondence in relation thereto. Hence the 
claim of privilege of the documents by the Central Government is in accordance with law and the documents 
submitted in sealed cover are not required to be disclosed in the public interest.” 


227. The prayers made in the aforesaid application are as under:- 
“PRAYER 


In view of the aforesaid, it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon’ble Tribunal may be pleased to: 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 51 


a) Grant privilege to Central Government for not sharing sealed cover documents as mentioned in para-I11 of 
the affidavit of Central Government or for bringing the said documents in the public domain both in national 
interest, interest justice, as well in public interest; and 


b) Pass such other and further order as this Hon’ble Tribunal deems fit and proper” 


228. The present application has been filed in the context of the fact that the concerned witness from the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (PW- 23) has sought to tender along with his affidavit a sealed envelope containing intelligence 
reports/inputs. 


229. The issue regarding privilege by the Central Government in respect of the documents disclosure whereof is 
injurious to public interest is specifically envisaged in the UAP Rules, 1968. Rule 3 of the said UAP Rules, is in the 
following terms :- 


“3, Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.—(1) In holding an enquiry under sub-section 
(3) of Section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of Section 7 or sub-section (8) of Section 
8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, 
as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), where any books of 
account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge by the 
Central Government and such books of account or other documents are claimed by that Government to be a 
confidential nature then, the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, -- 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it; or 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of account or 
other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings before it.” 


230. It can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing that notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, where any books of account or other documents are sought to be 
produced by the Central Government and these documents are claimed to be of a confidential nature, then the Tribunal 
shall not make such documents a part of the records of the proceedings before it or allow inspection of or grant a copy 
of the same to any person other than the parties to the proceedings before it. 


231. Rule 5 of the UAP Rules which provides for the documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal 
viz. a copy of the notification and all facts on which grounds specified in the notification are based, further provides 
that nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which it 
considers against public interest to disclose. The said rule is in the following terms:- 


“5, Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — Every reference made to the Tribunal 
under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) acopy of the notification made under sub-section (1) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal 
which that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


232. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of certain documents 
specifically came to be considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), wherein it was 
held as under :- 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine in nature and, 
therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued confidentiality in public 
interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such information, and, may be, also full particulars 
thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated 
by the Rules framed thereunder provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 
However, the non-disclosure of sensitive information and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, 
whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non-disclosure to the Tribunal as well. In 
such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the association or its 
office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the association or its office-bearers, but in 
order to perform its task of adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the 
purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In 
such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the 
credibility of such material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient cause 
for declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the 
strict sense. Such a procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the 


52 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


points in controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without abdicating 
its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a course would satisfy the 
minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the circumstances of each case, while protecting the 
rights of the association and its members, without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that 
the process of adjudication is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is 
reached by it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion already 
formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the United States Supreme Court, in a case of 
parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They include (a) written notice 
of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the parolee of evidence against him; (c) opportunity 
to be heard in person and to present witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and 
cross-examine adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not allowing 
confrontation), (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a traditional parole board, members of 
which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; and (f) a written statement by the factfinders as to the 
evidence relied on and reasons for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no thought to equate this 
second stage of parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the 
process should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and other material 
that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial.” 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzon v. Edward S. King placing reliance on Morrissey, while dealing with a similar situation, 
when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the credibility issue could be resolved by 
the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but assessing the credibility itself, and a modified 
procedure was indicated as under: 


बन 


. the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the parolee and his 
witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination by the parole board is that it 
resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the State report, without itself taking the statements 
from the informants. Thus the board had no way of knowing how reliable the informants were and had no 
real basis on which to resolve the credibility issue against the parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the informants at the hearing 
and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What we do mean is that the board should have 
received the information directly from the informants (although not necessarily in the presence of the 
parolee), instead of relying solely on the State report. The board could then have reached its own 
conclusions about the relative reliability of the informants’ statements and those of the parolee and his 
witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were the claims of 
potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their identity was disclosed, instead of 
placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, we hold that, in relying exclusively on the written 
synopsis in the State report, which was the only evidence of a parole violation, in the face of the parolee's 
denial and his presentation of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's parole was 
fundamentally unfair to him and was a denial of due process of law.” 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its source, in public 
interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the confidential information for the 
purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the conflicting evidence of the other side. This modified 
procedure satisfies the minimum requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic element of an 
adjudicatory process which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 19(4) on the freedom conferred by Article 19(1)(c) of 
the Constitution has to be reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for the notification to become effective 
on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting High Court Judge, on adjudication, after a show-cause 
notice to the association, that sufficient cause exists for declaring it to be unlawful. The provision for 
adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of existence of sufficient cause to justify the 
declaration must necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural justice to 
ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a 
mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a 
fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case, 
would depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which 
the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of 
its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in such matters are not 
confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 53 


form its opinion on all the points in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating 
to it, even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so requires. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for deciding the existence 
of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which is capable of judicial scrutiny. In this 
context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public interest by the Central Government would be permissible 
and the Tribunal is empowered to devise a procedure by which it can satisfy itself of the credibility of the 
material without disclosing the same to the association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of 
natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal to examine the material itself in the manner it considers 
appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the association. This modified procedure 
would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be that 


of the Tribunal itself.” 


233. The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman v. Government of India, 2001 SCC OnLine AP 663 
after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) upheld the ban imposed and further held that the 
entire material available on record itself need not be published or made available to the aggrieved person but what is 
required is disclosure of reasons and the grounds. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“19. The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not necessarily mean that the entire material 
available on record itself is to be published or made available to the aggrieved person. What is required is 
disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3 
alone is required to be referred to the Tribunal “for the purpose of adjudicating whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” The Tribunal after such reference is required to issue 
notice to the affected association to show cause, why the association should not be declared unlawful. The 
Tribunal is required to hold an enquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further 
information as it may consider necessary from the Central Government or from the association and then decide 
whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The Tribunal is require “to 
adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” As held by the 
Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India? the Tribunal is required to weigh the material on 
which the notification under sub-section (1) of Sec. 3 is issued by the Central Government after taking into 
account the cause shown by the Association in reply to the notice issued to it and by taking into consideration 
such further information which it may call for, to decide the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the action 
to be unlawful. The Tribunal is required to objectively determine the points in controversy. The Supreme Court 
further held that subject to non-disclosure of information which the Central Government considers to be against 
the public interest to disclose, all information and evidence relied on by the Central Government to support the 
declaration made by it of an association to be unlawful, has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to 
show cause against the same. The Tribunal is entitled to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating 
to the points in controversy. It is observed by the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a proper adjudication, it is necessary that the Tribunal should 
have the means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating to the points in controversy. 
Unless such a means is available to the Tribunal to determine the credibility of the material before it, it 
cannot choose between conflicting material and decide which one to prefer and accept. In such a 
situation, the only option to it would be to accept the opinion of the Central Government, without any 
means to test the credibility of the material on which it is based. The adjudication made would cease to be 
an objective determination and be meaningless, equating the process with mere acceptance of the ipse 
dixit of the Central Government. The requirement of adjudication by the Tribunal contemplated under the 
Act does not permit abdication of its function by the Tribunal to the Central Government providing merely 
its stamp of approval to the opinion of the Central Government. The procedure to be followed by the 
Tribunal must, therefore, be such which enables the Tribunal to itself assess the credibility of conflicting 
material on any point in controversy and evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept the 
version of the Central Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by the association. 
The difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the evidence of material in respect of which the 
Central Government claims nondisclosure on the ground of public interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material available on record subject to the claim 
of any privilege in this regard by the Central Government is only after the reference of the notification issued 
under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the purpose of adjudication whether or not there 
is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful. The material available on record may have to be 
revealed to the association or its members. In a case wherever any privilege is claimed, the Tribunal has to 
examine the material itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the 
same to the association. Therefore, there is no requirement to disclose the material itself and publish the same 
in the notification or provide to the association along with the notification issued in exercise of the power under 
proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 declaring the association to be unlawful with immediate effect. The 
requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and grounds and not the material. The notification issued in 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


exercise of the power under proviso to sub-sec. (3) of Section 3 cannot be set aside on the ground that the 
material relied upon for stating the reasons is not communicated to the association concerned declaring it to be 
an unlawful association with immediate effect. Such notification would become vulnerable only when the 
reasons are not notified: The record should contain the reasons in writing and the same is required to be 
revealed and published in the notification or communicated to the association concerned. Such reasons are 
required to be distinct and different and cannot be the same for imposing ban under Section 3 of the Act. The 
reasons are required to be communicated but not the entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after 
reference of the notification issued under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


234. The legal position, that emerges, can be succinctly put in the following terms:- 


i. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder contemplates 
maintenance of confidentiality whenever required in public interest; 


ii. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being disclosed to the Association or 
its office-bearers, for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that the 
same is reliable; 


iii. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and testing the credibility of such 
material 


iv. The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal in the manner it considers 
appropriate for the purpose of assessing/examining the confidential material/documents, and arriving at a 
conclusion based on a perusal thereof. 


235. Further, the rigors prescribed by the Supreme Court in the case of §$.P. Gupta (supra) have to be read in the 
context of the provisions of the UAPA and the Rules framed thereunder. In particular, it needs to be borne in mind 
that Rule 3(1) of the UAP Rules, 1968 expressly provides that in holding any inquiry under Sub-Section (3) of Section 
4 of the UAPA, the Tribunal shall follow “as far as practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian 
Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been contemplated in the context of Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, 
cannot ipso-facto be made applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent in making the provisions of the 
Evidence Act applicable only “as far as practicable” is evident from the nature of these proceedings. The proceedings 
before this Tribunal do not contemplate a full-fledged trial; rather the proceedings are in the nature of an “inquiry” as 
referred to in Section 4(3). 


236. Further, the proceedings are time-bound and as laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami 
Hind (supra), an appropriate procedure has to be devised/tailored by this Tribunal for the purpose of its inquiry. As 
such, any claim seeking privilege has to be assessed in terms of the in-built mechanism as provided under the UAPA 
and the Rules framed thereunder and the Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege from disclosure where it finds that 
the disclosure would be against/injurious to public interest. Thus, the nature of the documents has to be assessed by 
the Tribunal to see whether it contains any sensitive information, disclosure of which would be against public interest. 


237. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a sealed cover, it is found that the same 
contains intelligence reports, secret information collected from time to time by the investigating and intelligence 
agencies, notes/memos prepared by the investigating and intelligence agencies, information revealed on investigation 
including information as to the clandestine nature of the activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers 
and linkage of the association and its office-bearers with organizations and individuals outside of India. 


238. I find from the perusal of these documents that the disclosure of these documents would be detrimental to the 
larger public interest and security of the State. One of the documents which is contained in the sealed cover, is a note 
prepared for consideration of the cabinet committee on security, which contains sensitive information about activities 
of the Association and its inimical impact on national security. Clearly, the nature of these documents is such that it 
would be in public interest and in the interest of the security of the State to maintain confidentiality as regard thereto. 


239. 1 2150 note that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by the concerned witness from the Ministry of 
Home Affairs (PW - 23) to be based on a specific approval/direction of the Union Home Secretary (The head of the 
Department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant official/noting files shared with this Tribunal. 


240. In the circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect of the documents submitted in a 
sealed cover by the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Consequently, the Tribunal has proceeded 
to peruse the said documents, as contemplated in the Judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind 
(supra) and to assess the credibility thereof and the implications flowing therefrom for the purpose of the present 
inquiry. 


X. ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 55 


241. On the basis of the material placed on record and the evidence adduced by the Central Government, I find 
sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party (‘JKDFP’) as an unlawful 
association. 


242. The notification dated 5 October, 2023 issued under Section 3(1) of the Act inter alia mentions that, (i) the 
members of the JKDFP have been at the fore-front of the secessionist activities in Jammu and Kashmir; (ii) the leaders 
or members of the JKDFP have been involved in raising funds through various sources including those in Pakistan for 
promoting unlawful activities, including supporting terrorist activities; (iii) JKDFP and its members have scant respect 
towards the constitutional authority and constitutional set-up of the country; (iv) JKDFP and its leaders or members, 
particularly, its founder Shabir Ahmad Shah, have been indulging in unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the 
integrity, sovereignty, security and communal harmony of the country; (v) there are linkages between JKDFP with 
banned terrorist organizations. 


243. The above grounds/justification cited in the notification issued under Section 3(1) of the Act are borne out from 
the extensive evidence adduced by the Central Government. The said evidence can be broadly categorized into four 
categories:- 


i. Evidence adduced by officers(senior police officers) from Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir; 
ii. Evidence in the form of Charge-sheet filed in NIA case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI,; 


iii. Evidence showing receipt of funds by Shabir Ahmad Shah from Pakistan, and collusion with external 
agencies/inimical elements; and 


iv. Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal. 


Evidence adduced by officers from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 


244. As many as 20 senior police officers/officials from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir (PW1 — PW20) 
have deposed as regards the litany of incidents involving JKDFP/ Shabir Ahmad Shah since the past several decades. 
The same clearly brings out that the concerned association and its chief protagonist Shabir Ahmad Shah has been 
relentlessly indulging in “unlawful activities”. 


245. The incidents with regard to which voluminous evidence have been adduced, inter alia involves: 


i. raising anti-India and pro-Pakistan slogans (evidence of PW-1, PW-3, PW-5, PW-7, PW-8, PW-9, PW-10, 
PW-11, PW-12, PW-13, PW-15, PW-16, PW-19), 


li. encouraging boycott of elections and openly professing dis-allegiance towards the Constitution of India 
(evidence of PW-2, PW-5, PW-11, PW-12, PW-14, PW-16, PW17 and PW-20), 


iii. inciting the people of Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones on security forces 
(evidence of PW-1 PW-7, PW-10, PW-12, PW-15, PW-16, PW-17, PW-19 and PW-20), 


iv. undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India and professing affection towards Pakistan by 
making hate speeches (evidence of PW-2 PW-4, PW-9, PW-10, PW-12, PW-16, PW-20), 


v. instigating the general public intending to cause disaffection against India (evidence of PW-6, PW-7, PW- 
12, PW-16, PW-18 and PW-19), 


vi. raising of funds through various sources including for promoting unlawful activities, including supporting 
terrorism/ violence/ militancy, spreading secessionist ideology in Jammu and Kashmir (evidence of PW- 
18). 


246. On a cumulative consideration of the various incidents/activities which are subject matters of the various FIRs 
with regard to which the aforesaid evidence has been led, it is evident that JKDFP and its President Shabir Ahmad 
Shah have been indulging in “unlawful activities” and have posed a grave threat to the law and order situation in 
Jammu and Kashmir since the last several decades. 


247. Although it is true that the investigation in most of the FIRs (with regard to which PW-1 to PW- 20 have 
deposed) has been protracted, learned ASG of Union of India has sought to emphasise that the same was on account of 
hostile environment prevailing in the Territory of Jammu and Kashmir over a long period of time. However, what is 
of relevance to this Tribunal is the clear pattern that is discernible as regards the nature of activities of the concerned 
association and its office bearers. The pattern of conduct is to incessantly encourage secession of the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir, questioning or seeking to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India, inciting the people of 
Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones etc., and to disrupt peace in the region of Jammu and 
Kashmir. These activities continued unabated for a long period of time; it is only in the last few years (in the 
aftermath of the Jammu & Kashmir Re-organisation Act, 2019) that there has been a lull in the activities of the 
JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad Shah, as evident from the reduced instances of violence/disruption of law and order. 


56 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


248. This Tribunal also takes note of the fact that each of the senior police officers from the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, who have deposed before this Tribunal, during the course of their examination, strenuously emphasized 
from their own personal knowledge derived during the course of discharge of their official functions, that JEKDFP and 
its chairman Shabir Ahmad Shah and those other leaders and members have been: 


i. incessantly encouraging and have been actively and continuously advocating claims for secession of Jammu 
and Kashmir from the Union of India and have been inciting the local population; 


ii. promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of the country; 


iii. tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
on religious lines and have sought to escalate the separatist movement. 


249. The compelling testimony of officers from numerous districts of Jammu and Kashmir cannot be disregarded. 
The aforesaid evidence remains unrebutted by the concerned association/ its office bearers. At every stage of these 
proceedings, a right was afforded to the concerned association/its members and any other interested party in the matter 
to appear before this Tribunal and cross-examine the concerned officers who have deposed before this Tribunal. 
However, the said opportunity has not been availed. 


Evidence in the form of Charge-sheet filed in NIA case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI 


250. This case pertains to the terrorist and secessionist activities that have rattled Jammu and Kashmir since late 
1980’s and early 1990’s. Various terrorist organizations such as Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT), Hizub-ul-Mujahideen (HM), 
Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami, Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) etc. unleashed a 
spate of violence in the valley by attacking civilians as well as the security forces with the active support of the Inter- 
Services Intelligence (ISI) of Pakistan. Pakistan has not only been training the terror groups but also supporting them 
financially and diplomatically. Amidst the violent activities of the terrorists and mass exodus of the minority 
community from Jammu and Kashmir, the All Parties Hurriyat Conference (APHC) was formed as a conglomerate of 
26 political/social/religious organizations in the year 1993 which gave a political front to the secessionist activities. 


251. The investigation in the NIA case uncovered a conspiracy involving various terrorist organizations, such as 
JKLF, HM, and LeT, in collusion with secessionist groups comprising the APHC, funded by Pakistan and its 
agencies. The aim was to wage war against the Indian Government and advocating for the secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from India. APHC, initially formed as a political front, was found to be actively involved in inciting violence 
and unrest in Kashmir to further their secessionist agenda. Pursuant to the investigation, a charge-sheet dated 
18.01.2018 was filed before the NIA Special Court, New Delhi - against 12 accused persons (who are leaders in 
APHC), including two designated terrorists, based in Pakistan, as absconders. 


252. During the course of further investigation in the said case, it has been found that Shabir Ahmad Shah, as the 
head of JKDFP, played a significant role in building the separatist and militant movement in Jammu and Kashmir. 
Electronic devices seized from him and other accused individuals were analysed, revealing his involvement in 
conspiracies related to secessionist and terrorist activities. Shabir Ahmad Shah maintained contacts with Pakistan- 
based terrorist leaders and received funds through illicit channels like Hawala. He incited protests and unrest in 
Jammu & Kashmir, using funds raised through donations and Hawala transactions. Witness statements recorded under 
Section 161 of the Cr.P.C and Shah’s own disclosure statement further implicated him in planning and promoting 
separatist movements. He was involved in organizing protests, shutdowns, and inciting anti-India sentiments, using 
various social platforms. A supplementary charge sheet was filed on 04.10.2019 against Shabir Ahmad Shah (head of 
JKDFP) and other accused individuals, including Yasin Malik (head of JKLF), who pleaded guilty and was convicted, 
while the trial for others is still ongoing. 


253. The supplementary charge-sheet elaborates at length the nefarious role played by JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad Shah in 
building the separatist and militant movement in Jammu and Kashmir. It has been brought out therein that JKDFP and 
its chief protagonist Shabir Ahmad Shah has been the frontline secessionist entity vigorously pursuing the agenda of 
securing cessation of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. Further, it is stated that since formation of JKDFP 
on May 24, 1998, accused Shabir Ahmad Shah became the mouthpiece of Pak-ISI which had been handling him 
through his Pak/POK based representative i.e. Mehmood Ahmed Sagar. 


254. The chargesheet brings out that in pursuance of his secessionist agenda, accused Shabir Ahmad Shah, had been 
giving virulent anti-India public speeches. This has been substantiated from the scrutiny of the CD’s recovered from 
his house during search, which has revealed numerous instances wherein Shabir Shah made inflammatory speeches at 
several locations such as Kishtwar, Bhadarwa, Anantnag, Kargil, Poonch etc. instigating the masses to shout slogans 
in support of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India, and created such a surcharged atmosphere 
against Government of India that people started pelting stones on the security forces, who were deployed there to 
maintain law & order. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 57 


255. Para 9 of the affidavit filed by PW-22 P.B. Pathak, Deputy Deputy Superintendent of Police in the National 
Investigation Agency (NIA), New Delhi specifically mentions that on 26.02.2019 and 27.02.2019, 09 premises 
belonging to the separatists, the accused persons arraigned in the case and Shabir Ahmad Shah @ Shabir Shah were 
searched in Jammu and Kashmir, and electronic items were seized. The seized electronic devices were sent to Centre 
for Development of Advanced Computing (hereinafter referred to as “C-DAC’”) Trivandrum for analysis and expert 
opinion. Several incriminating videos have been extracted from the seized digital devices by the experts of C-DAC. 
Scrutiny report of articles seized from the residence of Shabir Ahmad Shah has been exhibited EX.PW22/4, the same 


is as under:- 


SCRUTINY REPORT OF ARTICLES SEIZED FROM THE HOUSE OF SHABBIR SHAH 


Name ot’ | Path way Gist Screen Shot of Video/Image : 

Device 

Black H:\Evd66\Optical | In a public ST this is 4.19 mi 
Colour _| Drives Bag-62 meeting Shabbir हि den fe me heed 


Shah is 


cD Nos\51-DVD- 18 sec to 46 sec and 


Album | Moserbaer-Public addressing 1,04 minute to 1.16 
out Meet-Shabir shah ae = है| minutes is material 
हा 2 हे 
| od, 
CDs (VTS 08_0! ) parents are soa 
fortunate whose 
sons are 


martyred, 


ey) 


People are also 
chanting slogans 
like Hum kya 
Chahte Azadi, 
hum cheen kar 
lenge azadi, 
hum lad kar 
lenge azadi ete. 
H:\Evd66\Optical | In this video 
Drives Bag-62 Shabbir Shah is 
Nos\51-DVD- addressing 

Moserbaer-Public | People that there 
Meet-Shabir shah | 78 ___ Conspiracy 


VT. against 
(VTS 11_01) Pakistan and 


Hindustan, 
Yahoodi and 
Nasroniyon 
want to destroy 
Pakistan. 

In this video 
Shabbir Shah is 
addressing 
public that we 
are grateful to 
Pakistan that he 
has sheltered 
our youth and 
standing on 
mountains for 
our freedom. 


This is 1.15 minute’ 
video and from = 
second to 45 second 
Shabbir Shah ig 
relevant part of the| 
video, 


H:\Evd66\Optical 
Drives Bag-62 
Nos\51-DVD- 
Moserbaer-Public 
Meet-Shabir shah 
{VTS 12 01) 


58 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


-do- 


H:\Evd66\Optical 
Drives Bag-62 
Nos\51-DVD- 
Moserbaer-Public 
Meet-Shabir shah 
(VTS 20_01) 


H:\Evd66\Optical 
Drives Bag-62 
Nos\51-DVD- 
Moserbaer-Public 
Meet-Shabir shah 
{VTS 21_01) 


H:\Evd66\Optical 
Drives Bag-62 
Nos\51-DVD- 

Moserbaer-Public 
Meet-Shabir shah 
(VTS 22_1) 


4) 


Shabbir Shah is 


This is 2.05 minutes | 


addressing Wes and from |.14 
people and to 1.38 is relevant 
—s part of the video. 
propaganda 


against RSS that 
RSS wil] impose 
cconomic 

blockage in 
valley like food, 
medicines, milk 
etc and will 
make their 
colony in valley. 
In the said video 
Shabbir Shah is 
addressing 

people that 
Hindustan will 
have to leave 
Kashmir 85 
British left. 


This is 55 second 
video and from }2 to, 
4] second is * 
period of the videa. 


During the | डा oe eee This video is 1.12 
public address sit ' second video and 
Shabbir Shah is aa entire video is 

praising Pakistan 
that Pak is the 
only country 
among 57 
country who bas 
nuclear = power 
and people of 
Pakistan is 
fighting for us in 
Kashmir. In the 
said video 
Shabbir Shah is 
provoking H 
people for azadi | PRA अल एक tae 


slogans etc. 
All above video seems to belong from same day and same location. 


[PART II—SEc. 3(1i)] 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


59 


During arrest of os ahem = aig प 
Shabbir Shah | 302 = 2 aay aa 
his party see 16 to 30 second is 
are chantin, जलन पक 
slogans of Ajedi” ait 
* Hum _ kya 
ehahte Azadi 
e Hum Cheen 
ke lenge 
aznadi. 
¢ Sarkar 
dehshatgardi 
band karo. 
e Is mulk ka 
faisal hum 
karenge, 
A video 
containing the 
footage of a 
public rally held 
in the month of 
Nov. 1995 at 
Pattan where 
Shabbir Shah is 
feading a rally 
and mounting on 
a bus. During 
the rally 
Nayeem Khan 
(Hurriyat 
leader) is 
provoking the 
people for azadi 
slogans. 
A <ideo 
containing the 
footage of a 
public rally held 
in the month of 
Noy, 1995 at 
Pattan where 
Shabbir Shah is 
addressing 
crowd and they 
chanting Azadi 
and anti national 
slogans. 
e Sarkar ne 
hamare { 
Mujehidon 


HAEvd68\51-DVD 


leader 
Nayeem Khan is 


Hi\Evd70\DVD-5S 
Pattern 
Raliy\VIDEO_TS 


This video is 14.26 
minutes video. 


Hurriyat leader 
Nayeem Khan is! 
associating | 
Shabbir Shah in 
his party rally. 


Hs\Evd70\DVD-5 
Patten 
Rally\VJDEO_TS 


(YTS_01_2) 
This video ts 32,17 
minutes. 


60 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SECc. 3(1i)] 


ko bandook 
uthane ko 
ma}boor 
kar diya. 
{12.19 
second) 
+$ शिक्षा oun 
Mujahidon 
ko salam 
karta hoon 
jinhone 
kom ke 
Itye...(17.58 
second) 
e Shabeer 
Shah fs 
praising 
about might 
of 
Mujhaheed, 


Apart from 
there several 
moment where 
party worker 
provoking 
people for 
chanting Azadi 
slogans. 

Video footage 
belong to 8 party 
worker meeting 
which was held 
in 25.05.1999 
where people are 
chanting azadi 
slogan, | where 
Shabeer Shah 
along with other 


HABvd70\DVD-8 4 
Tape\VIDEO_TS 


(VTS_O1_}) 


BAEvd70\DVD-13 
26 Tape 
Error\VIDEO_TS 


(VTS_012) _ 


| 


public address 


ey Length of the video 
mis 31.50 minutes 
and at 18.34 second 


for Azadi slogans. 


[भाग ए---खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 61 


-do- 


api Tape 
Error\VIDEO_TS 


(VTS_02_0) 


HAEvd70\DVD-13 
26 Tape 
Error\VIDEO_TS 


(VTS_02_1) 


HABvd70\DVD-13 | Video containing 
footage 
Shabbir shah 
political 

activities at 
Batote, Doda and 
Kishtwar. During 


gathering 
Shabbir Shah, 
Maulana ALK. 
Tari 
chairman 
Tehreek-e- 
Hurriyat) & 
Nayeem Khan 
addressed _ the 
people in 
Kishtwar party 
worker are 
chanting —anti 
Nation sfogan, 


‘| Batote: 38.49 
minute), 

(Kishtwar: 40.20 
minute). 


Video footage of 


gathering 

addressed by 
Shabbir Shah at 
Bhadarwa. 

During the 
address people 
are 


Azadi slogans. 


Hum Kya Chahte 
Azdai 48 


sof 


Public 


(Ex 


Hum = kys 
chahte 
Azadi. 

Hum Cheen 
ke _—lenge 
azadi, 

Hai hag 
hamara 
82801, 


Public 


chanting 


or . 


wen 


[a tee ५ नये A 
‘ 
, 
. 


Seen 


1१ ८ 7 EP 


Length of video of 
4.12 minutes. 


62 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEc. 3(1i)] 


-do- 


22 


(VTS_O1_!) 


22 


(VTS_03_!) 


H:s\Evd70\Evd70- 


HAEvd70\Evd70- 


Video containing 
footage of a 
party rally of 
JKDFP held in 
Anantnag in 
which people are 
chanting Azadi 
slogans. 


Hum kya 
chahte azadi, 
Hai haq hamara 
azadi 

{06.5 minutes & 


Video footages 
containing a 
party rally 
organized in 
Kargil by 
Shabbir Shah 
and his party 
JKDFP in which 
people hurriyat 
Jeader Shabbir 
Shah and other 
party worker are 
provoking 

people to 
chanting Azadi 


slogan. 


Hum led ke 
fenge azadi. 
Hum kya 
chahte azadil. 
Hum kya 
chahte azadi. 
(.52-1.24 


-o 


Be) कैफज leader 


Nayeem Khan is 
present in rally, 


Length of video is | 
| 33.10 minutes. । 


Length of video is 
14.12 minutes. 


[भाग ave 301)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


63 


HEvd70\Evd70- 
हि» | 


(४४8 01_)) 


प्र/४९५7०४५१५7१०- 
33 


(५718_01_2) 


Video is 
containing the 
footages, of a 
march in which 
Shabbir shah 
along with his 
party worker 
who were 
holding the 
banners for 
freedom and 
chanting the 
slogan: 


Video length is 


103.54 minutes, 


¢ Hum kya 
chahte 
azadi. 
Hai haq 
hamara 
azadi, 
Shabbir Shah is 
being garlanded 
by many women 
> who are 
chanting Azadi 
Slognas. In the 
same video party 


Lil ne दर is . ns हे - , थे 
worker are oak ye. oe 
chanting slogans; NY i ie 
¢ Hum kya A a3 है ः 7 


Length of video is 
16.49 minutes. 


chahte 

72: 1» | मे 

Hum Cheen 

ke lenhe 

azadi. 

Ye  pshad 

kya mange 

azadi. 

Ye = dharti 

kya mange 

82801. 

Ye maa kya 

mange 

azadi, Ete 
(from 20 to 30 
second 


Ey 37 ee ९, 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


Under the banner 
of All Party 
Hurriyat 
Conference, 
Shabbir Shah 
along with other 
Hurriyat leaders 
are marching a 
protest rally. 
During the rally 
they are chanting 
azadi i.e. 


HiEvd70\Evd70- 
43 


PYijco length is 
i कै: second. 


* Hum lad 
kar lenge 
azadi, hai 
hag hamara 
azadi and 
other anti 
Indla 
slogans and 
trying १0 
hustle fhe 
Securlty 
Force 
personnel, 

From 10 to 1.24 

second : . 

Shabbir Shah| er ; fem Length of video is 

along with his 116८ ४ अल अं minutes 

party worker 
protesting and 
chanting the 
azadi slogans in 
a rally 


Hi\Evd6\EVD69- 
20- 
0020.iso\MPEGAV 


H:\Evd69\EVD69- 
32-0032.iso 


Shabbir Shah | कि आओ ै हुआ ८211 of video is 
along with his} [a 15.16 minutes. 

party worker ate 
chanting Azadi 
slogan and 
demanding to 
leave Kashmir 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


e Kasmir 
hamara 
chod do. 
Etc 

From 00 to 58 

second 

Shabbir Shah 

addressed a 

public rally in 


iz 
39 


Black 
Colour 


> ft 


१ Poonch after a af ie , 

containing rally people { {; eel THF 

30 nos of started stone | हक, ४९ if raat -¢ 
pelting over | Ps ४. safe (५ 
security force 7 ० Ht Py ९० i 49 


personnel 


Me Length of video is 


Video containing 
12,08 second. 


the footage of a 
public rally of 
Shabbir Shah in 
his presence 
Nayeem Khan is 
provoking 

people fo come 
with his party for 
Azdi of Kashmir, 


kya 


H:\Evd69\EVD69- 
45 


(YTS_03_1) 


80 nos of 
CDs 


Hum 

Chahte 

azadi. 

e Hum lad kar 
lenge. 

« Hum _ cheen 
kar lenge, 
From 10.45 to 

11.02 minutes 

In a public rally 
at Kargil, Draas 
and Rajouri 
Shabbir is 
provoking public 
to chanting 
slogan “Hum kya 
Chahte Azadi”. 


Length of video is 
3312: 


प/8४75%ए४एफ७&- 
56-0056.iso 
(VTS_03_1) 


e From 1.21 to 
1,28 minute. 

e From 17.02 
to 17.08 
minute, 


H:lEvd69\EVD69- | In a party roed | Ae i UMCcagth of video is 
59 show Shabbir | i ee 43) कै) minutes. 
Shah along with ‘ ; 
his party worker 
are chanting 
slogans i.e, 


° Ha! hag 
hamara 
azadi, 


Hum cheen 
ke lenge 
aajadi. 


66 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


256. The above material seized from the chief of JKDFP clearly brings out the anti-national, secessionist agenda of 
JKDFP and its affinity with the terrorist/anti-national elements from across the border. 


257. The investigation conducted by the NIA has also brought out that Shabir Shah was in touch with Pak/POK 
based militant leadership including Syed Salahuddin (Chairman of HM and United Jihad Council), Hafiz Mohd. Saeed 
(Chief of JuD) and Iftikar Haider Rana (LeT Commander, Lahore, Pakistan). Shabir Shah has been paying tributes to 
the neutralized militants and, on his directions, delegations of his party used to visit family members of the slain 
terrorists. 


258. The supplementary chargesheet dated 04.10.2019 filed by the NIA concludes as under: - 


“During investigation, it has been established through oral testimonies and technical evidence that accused 
Shabir Ahmad Shah was a part and parcel of the deep-rooted conspiracy hatched by the Hurriyat leaders. To 
fulfil their secessionist designs, accused Shabir Shah had contacted/interacted with most of the other accused 
persons and mentors sitting abroad through various means including telephone and email. CDR analysis shows 
his connectivity with accused persons viz. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, Bitta Karate, Altaf Fantoosh, Peer 
Saifulla, Ayaz Akbar Khandey and Nayeem Khan. The accused persons, the terrorist organizations and the 
Pakistani establishment hatched a deep-rooted conspiracy to destabilize law and order in Jammu and Kashmir 
by carrying out terrorist attack, and by engineering stone-pelting and attacks on security forces and public 
property so as to create a surcharged atmosphere conducive to achieve secession of Jammu and Kashmir by 
inciting and instigating masses to wage a war against the Government of India, causing massive loss of lives 
and property”. 


259. The content of the chargesheet filed by the NIA offers an insight into the activities of JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad 
Shah and is another vital piece of material in support of the notification dated 05.10.2023. The said charge-sheet 
submitted to the Court under Section 173 of the Cr.P.C is relevant material that can be taken note of for the purpose of 
these proceedings. In Khatri (supra), the Supreme Court, while dealing with the investigation report of a person who 
was directed to investigate into the matter, has held that the reports of investigation are relevant under Section 35 of 
the Evidence Act. It was inter alia held as under: 


“These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by whom the twenty- 
four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh L.V. Singh, a public servant, in the 
discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and indubitably covered by Section 35. The language of 
Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary to refer to any decided cases on the interpretation of that section, 
but we may cite two decisions to illustrate the applicability of this section in the present case. The first is the 
decision of this Court in Kanwar Lal Gupta 7. Amar Nath Chawla. There the question was whether reports 
made by officers of the CID (Special Branch) relating to public meetings covered by them at the time of the 
election were relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they were, on the ground that they were (SCC 
p. 667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official duty and they were relevant under the first part of 
Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they contained statements showing what were the public meetings held by 
the first respondent”. This Court in fact followed an earlier decision of the Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. 
Perumal. So also in Jagdat v. Sheopal, Wazirhasan, J. held that the result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under 
Section 202 of the Code of CriminalProcedure, 1898 embodied in the report is an entry in a public record 
stating a fact in issue and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duties and the report is 
therefore admissible in evidence under Section 35. We find that a similar view was taken by a Division Bench of 
the Nagpur High Court in Chandulal 7. Pushkar Raj where the learned Judges held that reports made by 
Revenue Officers, though not regarded as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the private 
rights of the parties are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the discharge of their 
official duties, insofar as they supply information of official proceedings and historical facts. The Calcutta High 
Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B that official correspondence from the Forest Officer 
to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried on by the Forest Officer in the discharge of his official duty 
would be admissible in evidence under Section 35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind that the reports 
made by Sh L.V. Singh setting forth the result of the investigation carried on by him and his associates are 
clearly relevant under Section 35 since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant in the 


discharge of his official duty.” 


260. The contents of the aforesaid chargesheet filed by the NIA; the recoveries referred to therein, the statements of 
the accused persons as referred to therein; all give an insight as to the activities of JKDFP/ its members, the nexus 
thereof with nefarious elements from across the border, and substantiates the conclusions drawn in the notification 
dated 05" October, 2023 issued under Section 3(1) of the UAPA. 


Evidence showing receipt of funds by JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad Shah from Pakistan, and collusion with external 


agencies/inimical elements 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 67 


261. The supplementary chargesheet dated 04.10.2019 filed in NIA No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI specifically mentions 
that accused Shabir Shah was duly supported by the Pakistan agencies through the Hurriyat representatives such as 
Shafi Shair and Mehmood Sagar based in Pakistan. It has been established through oral testimonies and documents 
that accused Shabir Shah remained frequently in touch with these Pakistan-based entities and would receive money 
through Hawala from these persons. This is also corroborated by the complaint filed by the Enforcement Directorate 
against the accused Shabir Shah under Prevention of Money Laundering Act. In the said case, one Aslam Wani, an 
associate of accused Shabir Shah, and also the cash mule for the terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammad collected 
Hawala money in Delhi and handed over the same to the accused Shabir Shah to be used for carrying out subversive 
and anti-national activities. The said Aslam Wani was arrested with Rs.63 lakhs, received through hawala channels 
from Middle East and explosive/arms and ammunition on 26.08.2005 by the Delhj Police. A case FIR No. 122/2005 
ws 121, 121A, 122, 123, 120B IPC, Section 4&5 of Explosive Substances Act and Section 25 of Arms Act was 
registered by Special Cell, Delhi Police on 26.08.2005 and a charge-sheet was filed vide Police Case No. 122/2005. 


262. The statement of Aslam Wani recorded under Section 161 of Cr.P.C in NIA case gives minute details as to the 
manner in which Shabir Ahmad Shah instructed him for the purpose of collection of cash based on instructions 
received from Pakistan based mobile phone numbers, and delivery thereof to Shabir Ahmad Shah. The said statement 
is exhibited as Ex. PW22/8 alongwith affidavit of PW-22. 


263. Investigation by the Enforcement Department further revealed that accused Shabir Ahmad Shah was in touch 
with Hafiz Saeed, the Chief of banned terror outfit ‘Jamat-ud-Dawa’ and a Global Terrorist, based in Pakistan on 
phone on the issue of Kashmir, and also with Mohd. Shafi Shair who hails from Kashmir but is presently residing in 
Pakistan. On the analysis of the CDRs, it was found that Shabir Shah received several calls on his mobile number, 
from Mohd. Sahi Shair from his Pakistan number, during the period from 22.01.2017 to 26.01.2017. 


264. The above mentioned findings are also corroborated by the contents recovered from Shabir Shah’s emails, under 
Section 27 of the Evidence Act. On scrutiny of the emails downloaded from the inbox of accused Shabir Shah, 
revealed an email received from Shafi Shair in which the said Shafi Shair had mentioned details of funds distributed in 
US Dollars and INRs among various persons including Shabir Shah. 


265. The supplementary chargesheet also mentions that accused Shabir Shah was receiving funds from Pakistan 
through some conduits, and the same is also substantiated by the document/s seized from the house of Ghulam 
Mohammad Bhat, the accountant-cum-cashier of accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. The document shows accused 
Shabir Shah having received an amount of Rs. 10,00,000/- on 29.04.2015 from Hawala conduit Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali. 


266. It has also been mentioned in the chargesheet, that APHC leaders including Shabir Shah, raised funds through 
LOC trade. LOC trade route was also “abused” by elements from the neighbouring country to smuggle illegal 
weapons, drugs and fake currency into India. The funds generated by committing irregularities in LoC trade were used 
to fuel subversive and militant activities in Jammu and Kashmir. 


267. The supplementary chargesheet also mentions that the investigation has established that funds are being sent by 
Pakistan to the secessionists and terrorists in the Kashmir Valley including Shabir Shah for organizing forcible 
closures, anti-India protests and processions and stone-pelting on the security officers. 


268. Further, the investigation is stated to have revealed that in the year 2016, the Pakistan Government sent an 
amount of Rs.1,10,00,000/- (Rs. One Crore and Ten Lacs only) to accused Shabir Shah to be distributed among those 
who had resorted to stone-pelting on the security forces in Jammu & Kashmir and who had then got injured in the 
action of the security forces. This clearly shows that accused Shabir Shah, alongwith the other accused persons, is at 
centre of the conspiracy to promote lawlessness and violence in Jammu & Kashmir orchestrated with an intention to 
secure secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. 


269. It is notable that the email ID of JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad Shah from which incriminating documents were 
received were opened and accessed using the password provided by Shabir Ahmad Shah himself during the course of 
investigation. This has been specifically referred to in the pointing-cum-recovery memo exhibited Ex.PW21/4 
alongwith affidavit of PW-21, which inter alia records as under:- 


“Firstly, the print of screen shots of the computer system and Internet connections are taken. Accused Shabir 
Ahmad Shah is directed to open his email ID “shabirashah@rediffmail.com. He entered the password of his 
rediffmail ID. The email ID opened and accessed. Screen shots of the proceedings related to this email account 
shabirashah@ rediffmail.com were obtained. The important data of the email was extracted and got printed 
alongwith the above screen shots. Same is marked as Annexure-I (12 pages). Printout of the important emails 
was taken out and same is marked as Annexure-2 (28 pages)” 


68 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


270. Both the supplementary charge-sheet filed by NIA in Case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI, and the charge-sheet 
filed by Enforcement Directorate in ECIR No. 03/DLZO-II/2017 reveals the receipt of funds by Shabir Ahmad Shah 
from Pakistan through conduits, and the same is stated to be substantiated by the documents seized from the house of 
Gulam Ahmed Bhat, the accountant-cum-cashier of co-accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. 


271. In National Investigation Agency v. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, (2019) 5 SCC 1, the Supreme Court while 
considering whether grant of bail to Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali was justified or not considered the evidentiary 
material regarding the flow of funds from across the border, and specifically noted as under: - 


“Ample material has been collected to show the linkages between the Hurriyat leaders of the J&K and 
terrorists/terrorist organisations and their continuous activities to wage war against the Government of India.” 


272. The Supreme Court also took note of the copious and elaborate evidence which showed flow of funds to 
terrorists/hurriyat leaders which was utilized for the purpose of terrorist/unlawful activities in Jammu and Kashmir. 
This was specifically taken note of by the Supreme Court in Para 39, 40 and 41, which are reproduced hereunder :- 


“39. Reverting to the documents on which emphasis has been placed, Document No. D-132 is the seizure memo 
of properties seized from the premises of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt (W-29), the then Munshi/Accountant of the 
respondent (Accused 10). Document No. D-132(a) is the green page document, seized during the search of the 
residence of the said Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt, containing information about foreign contributions and 
expenditures of the respondent (Accused 10) during 2015/2016. Whether this document is admissible in 
evidence would be a matter for trial. Be that as it may, besides the said document, the statements of Ghulam 
Mohammad Bhatt (W-29) has been recorded on 30-8-2017 and 1-11-2017. Whether the credibility of the said 
witness should be accepted cannot be put in issue at this stage. The statement does make reference to the diaries 
recovered from his residence showing transfer of substantial cash amounts to different parties, which he has 
explained by stating that cash transactions were looked after by the respondent (Accused 10) himself. He had 
admitted the recovery of the green-coloured document from his residence, bearing signature of the respondent 
(Accused 10) and mentioning about the cash amounts received and disbursed during the relevant period 
between 2015 and 2016. The accusation against the respondent (Accused 10) is that accused A-3 to A-10 are 
part of the All Parties Hurriyat Conference which calls itself a political front, whereas their agenda is to create 
an atmosphere conducive to the goal of cessation of J&K from the Union of India. The role attributed to the 
respondent (Accused 10) is that of being part of the larger conspiracy and to act as a fund raiser and finance 
conduit. Ample material has been collected to show the linkages between the Hurriyat leaders of the J&K and 
terrorists/terrorist organisations and their continuous activities to wage war against the Government of India. 


40. Regarding the funding of terrorist activities in J&K and, in particular, the involvement of the respondent 
(Accused 10), the charge-sheet mentions as under: 


“17.6. Funding of secessionist and terrorist activities in Jammu & Kashmir: 


If publicity and propaganda is oxygen for the terror groups, terror financing is its life-blood. Terror 
financing provides funds for recruitment, operationalisation of training and training camps, procurement 
of arms and ammunition, operational cost of planning and resources for terrorist acts, running of 
underground networks, well-planned stone pelting, school burnings, targeted attacks, provision of legal 
support for terrorists and over-ground workers facing judicial process, ex gratia payment for militants 
killed in terrorist operations, regular payments to the families of terrorists and militants killed or 
convicted, funds for propaganda to clergy as well as relief measures for civilian population and also in 
case of natural disasters. The investigation in the case has revealed that the secessionists are mobilising 
funds from all possible sources to fuel unrest and support the ongoing secessionist and terrorist activities 
in Jammu & Kashmir. 


17.6.1. Funding from Pakistan: 


(i) The Hurriyat leaders are receiving funds from Pakistan through conduits and also from the Pakistan 
High Commission directly. It was substantiated by an incriminating document seized from the house of 
GhulamMohd. Bhatt during search. GhulamMohd. Bhatt worked as the cashier-cum-accountant with 
Accused A-10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, a known Hawala conduit. The document clearly shows that 
Accused A-10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali was receiving money from Accused A-1 Hafiz Saeed (Head of 
Jamaat-ud-Dawa), from the IST, from the Pakistan High Commission at New Delhi and also from a source 
based in Dubai. Accused A-10 was remitting the same to the Hurriyat leaders, separatists and stone- 
pelters of Jammu & Kashmir. The said document has been maintained in regular course of his business 
and is signed by accused ZahoorWatali himself. This document clearly shows that Hurriyat leaders were 
receiving funds from Pakistan through the officials of Pakistan High Commission and through accused A- 
10 ZahoorWatali. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 69 


The signature of accused A-10 ZahoorWatali has also been verified and as per the expert report, his 
signature on the questioned document matches with his specimen handwriting as well as his admitted 
handwriting. 


(ii) Further, the role of Pakistan in funding secessionist activities also surfaced in the scrutiny of 
the unedited version of the audio/video furnished by the office of India Today TV news channel wherein 
accused A-5 Nayeem Khan admits that the secessionists and terrorists of the Valley are receiving financial 
support from Pakistan and would have received approximately Rs 200 crores to organise anti-India 
protests and agitations after the killing of Burhan Wani, the Commander of the proscribed terror 
organisationHizb-ul-Mujahiddin. He further speaks about funds reaching them from Saudi Arabia/Dubai 
through Hawala via Delhi (Balimaran/Chandni Chowk). He admits that S.A.S. Geelani (Chairman, 
APHC-G), Mirwaiz Umar Faroog (APHC-M) and Yasin Malik (JKLF) are receiving funds from Pakistan. 
He further admits the pivotal role played by the Pakistan High Commission to convey and receive 
instructions from Pakistan. Nayeem Khan also stated that the accused Hafiz MohdSaeed has supported 
S.A.S. Geelani, Chairman, APHC-G by paying at least 10-12 crores during anti-India agitation after 
killing of Burhan Wani. Accused Nayeem Khan further admitted that, if funded, he can fuel unrest in the 
Valley any time. 


(iii) Similarly, the scrutiny of the audio/video of the sting operation also reveals accused A-6 Farooq 
Ahmad Dar Bitta Karate admitted that the funds are being sent by Pakistan to the secessionists and 
terrorists in the Kashmir Valley including him for organising forcible closures, anti-India protests and 
processions and stone-pelting on the security forces. He further claimed that he has his cadres in every 
part of Kashmir who can act on his call at any given point of time and fuel unrest in the Valley. When 
given an offer of financial support, accused Bitta Karate put forth a demand of Rs 70 crores for fuelling 
unrest up to six months. 


The voice samples of Nayeem Khan and Farooq Ahmad Dar alias Bitta Karate have been forensically 
examined and the CFSL report has confirmed the match with their voices. 


(iv) Further, the investigation has revealed that the seniormost officials of the High Commission of 
Pakistan were in regular contact with the Hurriyat leaders. The High Commission of Pakistan in New 
Delhi used to organise functions and meetings in New Delhi, to which the Hurriyat leaders from Kashmir 
were invited and they were given instructions and funds on a regular basis. These funds were given to 
various allied groups of the APHC and investigation has revealed that a First Secretary level officer of 
Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi would act as a channel and A-10 Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali 
would act as a courier to deliver the funds to the Hurriyat leadership. These funds as explained above 
were used to foment the secessionist and separatist activities and unrest in the Valley in an organised 
manner. One such invitation card from the Pakistan High Commission was seized from the house of A-6 
Faroog Ahmad Dar alias Bitta Karate: 


On the occasion of the National Day 
Pakistan High Commissioner and 
Mrs Salman Bashir 
Request the pleasure of the company of 
Mr Faroog Ahmed Dar 
At a Reception 
on Friday, 22-3-2013 from 1930 to 2100 hrs. 


Venue: RSVP 
2/50-G, Shantipath, Tel. O11-24121819 
Chanakyapuri, New Delhi Fax 011-26872339 


Dress : National/Lounge Suit/Uniform E-mail : pakhcnd@ gmail.com 
(Please bring this card with you) 


Investigation has also established that the accused A-4 was in direct contact with the High Commissioner 
of Pakistan in New Delhi and would apprise him about the situation in Jammu & Kashmir. 


17.6.2. Funding from terrorist organisations based in Pakistan: 


During the course of investigation, it is also ascertained that the separatists and secessionists of Jammu & 
Kashmir were also receiving money from the terrorists and terrorist organisations operating out of 
Pakistan/PoKk. The incriminating document seized from the house of GhulamMohd. Bhatt who worked as 
a cashier-cum-accountant with accused A-10 ZahoorWatali shows that ZahoorWatali received money 


70 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


from accused 4-1 Hafiz Saeed, Head of JuD and Chief of proscribed terror organization Lashkar-e-Toiba 
and remitted it to the Hurriyat leaders espousing the cause of secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the 
Union of India. 


17.6.3. Local Donations/Zakat/Baitulmal: 


During the course of investigation, it is established that the Hurriyat has its network of cadres at districts 
and local levels. There are District Presidents and block level leaders who have the responsibility to raise 
the funds through donation during the religious festivals and month of Ramzan. In a well-established 
system, the receipt books are printed and funds are collected from shopkeepers, businessmen and 
residents of Kashmir. The money is also collected to become a member of the Tehreek-e-Hurriyat. 
Selected members are made as Rukuns and are tasked to propagate the separatist ideology of Hurriyat. 
These Rukuns act as foot soldiers and ensure that bandhs and hartaals are successful. They also lead the 
processions and participate in stone pelting. 


Investigation also established that various District Presidents collect Rs 5 to 10 lakhs per district as 
Baitulmal. Funds are also collected from apple-growers and businessmen who are compelled to donate to 
Hurriyat central office. This money is used for administrative and operational purposes of organising 
protests and strikes as well as for aid to militants and their families. 


The seizure of unaccounted receipts of an amount of Rs 1,15,45,000 from accused A-4 Altaf Ahmad Shah 
Fantoosh also shows that money is being raised by way of donations. Similarly, records pertaining to the 
collection of funds were also seized from the house of accused A-8 MehrajuddinKalwal, who was also the 
District President of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat for Srinagar and Ganderbal. 


Further, during the course of investigation, it is also established that the Hurriyat leadership appeals to 
the public to contribute money generously by way of donations for their so-called freedom movement. This 
is clearly reflected in the website of the Hurriyat Conference viz. www.huriyatconference.com, which 
shows a message from S.A.S. Geelani “Help the families of martyrs and prisoners..... people should come 
forward for donations in the month of Ramadan as the number of people affected by this movement is 
large”. 


This substantiates that Hurriyat is raising funds through donations and using the same to fuel secessionist 
activities and to support the families of killed and jailed terrorists. 


17.6.4. LoC Trade: 


During the course of investigation, it has been established that the secessionist and separatist leaders are 
raising funds through LoC trade by way of directing the Kashmiri traders to do under-invoicing of the 
goods which were imported through LoC barter trade. They sell the goods to the traders in Delhi and a 
part of the profit of the same is shared with the Hurriyat leaders and other separatists, which in turn is 
used on anti-India propaganda, for mobilising the public to organise protests and stone-pelting and to 
support families of killed/jailed militants. The hawala operators based in Srinagar, New Delhi and other 
parts of the country and abroad are being used to transfer the funds so generated. The investigation has 
revealed that the funds are generated by resorting to sale of third-party goods, under-weighing, under- 
invoicing, large-scale dealings in cash and committing irregularities in maintenance of records. This 
modus operandi leads to generation of huge cash surpluses on the Indian side which are then channelised 
through several formal banking channels as well as cash couriers and hawala dealers to the separatists 
and secessionists active in Jammu & Kashmir. 


Investigation has revealed that a significant number of traders engaged in cross LoC trade have relatives 
across the border who are closely associated with banned terrorist organisations, especially Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen. Investigation has also revealed that certain ex-militants and their family members are using 
proxy companies and are registered as traders. During the course of investigation, use of LoC trade route 
for smuggling of contraband and weapons has also come to light. A separate investigation is underway 
regarding the irregularities in the LoC trade. 


17.6.5. Hawala: 


Apart from the abovementioned sources and channels, the secessionists depend heavily on the hawala 
network and conduits to bring money from offshore locations to India to fuel anti-India activities in 
Jammu & Kashmir. 


(i) During the course of investigation, it was ascertained that accused A-10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali is 
one such conduit. The seizure of the incriminating document from the house of his cashier-cum- 
accountant viz. Ghulam Mohd. Bhatt regarding the foreign contributions received by Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali from Pakistani establishment and terror organisations and their further remittance to the Hurriyat 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 71 


leaders and secessionists of Jammu & Kashmir clearly shows that he was an active channel to transmit 
funds from abroad to India to fuel secessionist activities and to wage a war against the Government of 
India. 


(ii) During the course of investigation, it is revealed that accused A-10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali was 
bringing money from offshore locations to India by layering it through the scores of firms and companies 
he has opened. It was ascertained that Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali has an NRE A/c No. 
0252040200000505 in J&K Bank and he received foreign remittances to the tune of Rs 93,87,639.31 in 
this account from 2011 till 2013 from unknown sources. 


(iii) During the course of investigation, it was also ascertained that the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali was showing foreign remittances under ‘other income’ in his proprietorship firm viz. Trison 
International, Srinagar. From the analysis of his bank accounts, it has been ascertained that foreign 
remittances to the tune of Rs 2,26,87,639.31 were received by the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali in 
different accounts from the year 2011 to 2016. An amount of Rs 93,87,639.31 came in Zahoor Ahmad 
Shah Watali A/c No. NRE-0252040200000505 in J&K Bank from 2011 to 2013. An amount of Rs 14 lakhs 
was remitted in the account of Acharya Shri Chander College of Medical Sciences (Ascoms), Jammu 
Account No. 1213040100000229 on 9-4-2013 through NEFT against fee deposited for his son viz. 
YawarZahoor Shah Watali. An amount of Rs 60 lakhs was remitted in current account of accused Zahoor 
Ahmad Shah Watali in J&K Bank A/c No. CD4508. An amount of Rs 5 lakhs was remitted in the account 
of Trison Farms and Constructions (P) Ltd. Acc OTN-10162. The investigation has revealed that all these 
foreign remittances are from unknown sources. 


(iv) During the course of investigation, it was also revealed that on 7-11-2014, one Naval Kishore 
Kapoor, son of Om Prakash Kapoor, resident of PO Box 8669, Oman, UAE entered into an agreement 
with Trison Farms and Constructions (P) Ltd. through its Managing Director Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali 
to take a piece of land measuring 20 kanals in SozeithGoriporaNagbal, Badgam on lease in consideration 
of an amount of Rs 6 crores as premium and Rs 1000 annual rent for an initial period of 40 years 
extendable as may be mutually agreed between the parties. In the agreement, M/s Trison Farms and 
Constructions (P) Ltd. was declared to be the absolute owner of the piece of land in question. Mr Naval 
Kishore Kapoor remitted a total amount of Rs 5.579 crores in 22 instalments between 2013 and 2016 to 
the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. 


(v) During the course of investigation, it was ascertained that no land exists in the name of M/s Trison 
Farms and Constructions (P) Ltd. as per the balance sheets of the said company (AY 2011-12 to 2016-17). 
It was also ascertained that the large sum of money i.e. Rs 5,57,90,000 was mobilised by Naval Kishore 
Kapoor from unknown sources and remitted to the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali over a period of 2 
years to lease a piece of land which is not even existing in the name of the company mentioned as first 
party in the agreement and the agreement itself lacks legal sanctity. This proves that the said agreement 
was a ‘cover’ created by the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali to bring foreign remittances from 
unknown sources to India. 


(vi) During the course of investigation, it is also ascertained that the Chartered Accountant, who signed 
the audited balance sheets of the firms belonging to the accused A-10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali viz. M/s 
Trison International (2013-14 and 2015-16), Trison Farms and Constructions (P) Ltd. (2013-14 and 
2015-16), M/s 3Y (2012-13, 2013-14 and 2015-16) and M/s Yasir Enterprises (2013-14 and 2015-16) did 
so without seeing any supporting documents. The balance sheets of these companies were sent to him by 
one Mustaq Mir, Cost Accountant and Shabir Mir, Chartered Accountant from Wizkid Office, Srinagar 
through email and he was asked to sign on them in Delhi without showing any documents. 


This clearly shows that ZahoorWatali was remitting money received from unknown sources to India. 


(vii) The investigation has also revealed that in the FY 2010-11, a firm belonging to accused A-10 Zahoor 
Ahmad Shah Watali and his family members viz. Trison Farms and Constructions (P) Ltd. raised 
unsecured loan of Rs 2,65,55,532 from the Directors of the company i.e. the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah 
Watali, his wife Sarwa Begum and his sons YassirGaffar Shah, YawarZahoor&YaminZahoor in the form 
of both cash and cheque and the same was used towards repayment of secured loan of Rs 2,94,53,353 in 
the books of J&K Bank. The source of money with the Directors could not be explained satisfactorily by 
the accused Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali. 


(viii) The seizure from the house of accused A-10 Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, of a list of IST officials and 
a letter from Tariq Shafi, proprietor of AI Shafi group addressed to Pakistan High Commission 
recommending grant of visa to ZahoorWatali shows his proximity with Pakistani establishment. It is 
pertinent to mention here that the name of Tariq Shafi figures in the document of foreign contributions 
seized from the house of ZahoorWatali's cashier-cum-accountant viz. GhulamMohd. Bhatt. 


72 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


41. In reference to these accusations, the entry in the diaries and the green-coloured document, recovered from 
the residence of Ghulam Mohammad Bhatt, is significant. Further, the seizure memo described as Document 
No. D-3/6, in respect of search and seizure of articles/documents seized from the premises of the respondent 
(Accused 10) dated 3-6-2017, would unravel the activities of the respondent, including regarding his financial 
deals. Another crucial document described as D-3g/20 is a contact diary seized from the respondent vide Memo 
D-3, which contains the Pakistan National name and contact “Tariq Shafi 0092425765022... 26-A”’ whose 
name figures in Document No. D-132(a)/23. The Code “0092” pertains to Pakistan. Another contact diary was 
seized from the respondent vide Memo D-3, which, at p. D-3h/28 contains the same name and contact, namely, 
“Tariq Shafi 00923008459775/0092425765022”. The Documents No. D-3j to D-3j/5 also indicate the 
involvement of the respondent in terrorist activities, including that three cases of TADA have been registered 
against him in the past and investigated and one case of J&K PSA, 1978.” 


273. On the basis of the perusal of the evidence, the Supreme Court found that the grant of bail to Zahoor Ahmad 
Shah Watali was unjustified. Further investigation in NIA case no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI and ECIR No. 03/DLZO- 
II/2017 fortified the connection between Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali and JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad Shah. 


274. In the affidavit filed on behalf of the ED, it has been specifically brought out that Shabir Ahmad Shah was 
receiving funds from Pakistan through Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, identified as a Hawala conduit. Documents seized 
from the house of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat, an associate of Watali, in the NIA investigation, show Shabir Ahmad 
Shah receiving a significant sum of money. In a statement recorded under section 50 of PMLA, 2002, Shabir Ahmad 
Shah is stated to have affirmed his association with Watali but offered no comments when presented with documents 
indicating the receipt of funds. He failed to provide any explanation regarding the source or utilization of the funds. 
Further investigation under PLMA is stated to have revealed that the Pakistani Government sent Rs.1,10,00,000/- 
(Rupees One Crore and Ten Lakh Only) to Shabir Ahmad Shah for distribution among individuals involved in stone- 
pelting incidents in Jammu & Kashmir. These funds were intended for those who had been injured during clashes with 
security forces. This allegation suggests Shah’s involvement in promoting unrest and violence in the region. 


275. This Tribunal is conscious that the veracity of the contents of the aforesaid chargesheet/s filed by NIA, is 
required to be established at trial in the said case and that the scope of scrutiny of the material cited by the Central 
Government is not akin to a criminal trial as held in para 26 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). However, for the 
purpose of these proceedings, the said evidence is in the nature of relevant material and liable to be considered, in 
terms of the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) and Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). As mandated 
in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), this tribunal has examined the 
material cited by the Central Government for the purpose of making an “objective assessment” for the purpose of 
these proceedings and to assess whether the same supports the declaration made under Section 3(1) of UAPA vide the 
notification dated 57 October, 2023. 


Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal 


276. As noted hereinabove, the documents submitted by the witness who has deposed on behalf of the Central 
Government, inter alia, includes reports of intelligence agencies, the note prepared for the Cabinet Committee on 
Security setting out the entire background of JKDFP and its activities based on the information collated by the 
intelligence agencies and also bringing out linkage of JKDFP with cross-border agencies/establishments, inputs 
received from Criminal Investigation Department, Jammu and Kashmir (Srinagar). 


277. A perusal of the said documents has brought out in vivid detail the terrorist and secessionist activities of JKDFP 
in close coordination with inimical elements in Pakistan. The systematic attempts to promote secession of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the territory of India, to undermine the sovereignty of India, to incite the local populace and to promote 
violence have been brought out in the said material/documents. 


278. The Tribunal has also opened the sealed cover (Ex.PW-22/9) containing the statements of the protected 
witnesses (code named as Alpha, John, X45 and X 46) in NIA case no. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI and perused the said 
statements and re-sealed the same with the seal of the Tribunal. The statements of the said protected witnesses also 
shed light on the modus operandi employed by the JKDFP/Shabir Ahmad Shah to receive funds from across borders 
and indulge in unlawful activities. 


Conclusion 


279. From the elaborate material/evidence placed on record in these proceedings, this Tribunal finds that there is 
ample justification to declare JKDFP as an unlawful association under the UAPA. Moreover, given the nature of 
activities of the association, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to the proviso to Section 3 (3) of 
the UAPA. As noticed hereinabove, the activities of the concerned association have had a deleterious effect on 
maintenance of law and order in the region of Jammu and Kashmir over the last several decades. The modicum of 
stability that has come about after 2019 (as is evident from the reduced number of unconducive incidents) could not 
have been allowed to be jeopardized on account of continuing activities of the concerned association. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 73 


280. In the framework of the Indian Constitution and the UAPA, there is no space for an association like the JKDFP 
which openly propagates secessionism, avowedly expresses dis-allegiance to the Constitution of India, and 
undermines the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. 


281. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967 
and its Rules and having independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated the material and evidence on 
record, is of the firm and considered view that there is sufficient cause for declaring JKDFP as an unlawful association 
under Section 3(1) of the UAPA, 1967, vide the notification dated 5" October, 2023. Thus, an order is passed under 
Section 4 (3) of the UAPA, 1967 confirming the declaration made in the notification bearing no. SO 4348(E) 
published in the official gazette on 5" October, 2023 issued under Section 3 (1) of the Unlawful Activities Prevention 
Act, 1967. 


JUSTICE SACHIN DATTA, 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal 
APRIL 03, 2024” 
[F.No.14017/30/2024-NI-MFO] 
ABHIJIT SINHA, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.  ravinver 
KUMAR 


