रजिस्ट्री सं" Ste एल"--(एन)04/0007/2003---24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24 


JN क रॉलपन 
The Gazette of Gudia 


GO oM. -Z). Wer. -37.-6022024-25244 
CG-DL-E-6022024-25244 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग त-- ars 
PART II — Section i 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 5] नई दिल्‍ली, बृहस्पतिवार, फरवरी 5, 2024/माघ 26, 945 (शक) 
No. 5] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 5, 2024/MAGHA 26, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE 
(Legislative Department) 


New Delhi, the 5th February, 2024/Magha 26, 945 (Saka) 


The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the 
i5th February, 2024 and is hereby published for general information:— 


THE WATER (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION) 
AMENDMENT ACT, 2024 


No. 5 oF 2024 
[5th February, 2024.] 


An Act further to amend the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) 
Act, 974. 


Whereas in pursuance of clause (/) of article 252 of the Constitution, the Water 
6 of 974 (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 974 had been passed by Parliament; 


Anp WeereEAs it is considered necessary to make certain amendments thereto for 
decriminalising and rationalising minor offences to further enhance trust-based governance 
for ease of living and doing business; 


Awnp Whereas in pursuance of clause (2) of article 252 of the Constitution read with 
clause (2) thereof, resolutions have been passed by the Legislative Assemblies of the States 
of Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan to the effect that the said Act should be amended by an 
Act of Parliament for the purposes hereinafter appearing. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. (l) This Act may be called the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Short title 


Act, 2024. application and 
commencement. 


Amendment of 
section 4. 


Amendment of 
section 5. 


Amendment of 
section 25. 


Insertion of new 
section 27A. 


Power to issue 
guidelines. 


Substitution of 
new sections 4 
and 4A for 
section 4]. 


Failure to 
comply with 
provisions of 
section 20 or 
directions issued 
thereunder. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


(2) It applies, in the first instance, to the whole of the States of Himachal 
Pradesh and Rajasthan and the Union territories; and it shall apply to such other 
State which adopts this Act by resolution passed in that behalf under clause (.) of 
article 252 of the Constitution read with clause (2) thereof. 


(3) It shall come into force, at once in the States of Himachal Pradesh and 
Rajasthan and the Union territories, and in any other State which adopts this Act 
under clause (l) of article 252 of the Constitution read with clause (2) thereof on 
the date of such adoption. 


2. In section 4 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 974 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after 
the words “State Government”, the words “in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government” shall be inserted. 


3. In section 5 of the principal Act, in sub-section (9), after the word 
“prescribed”, the words “by the Central Government” shall be inserted. 


4. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), for the proviso, the 
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:— 


“Provided that the Central Government may in consultation with the 
Central Board, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt certain 
categories of industrial plants from the provisions of this sub-section.”. 


5. After section 27 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 
inserted, namely:— 


“27A. (/) Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the Central 
Government in consultation with the Central Board, may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, issue guidelines on the matters relating to the grant, 
refusal or cancellation of consent by any State Board for establishment of 
any industry, operation or process, or treatment and disposal system or to 
bringing into use of a new or altered outlet including the mechanism for 
time-bound disposal of the application made under section 25 or period of 
validity of such consent. 


(2) Every State Board, in discharge of its functions for the purposes 
of grant, refusal or cancellation of consent under section 25 or section 27 
shall act in accordance with the guidelines issued under sub-section (/).”. 


6. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 
substituted, namely:— 


“Al. (7) Whoever contravenes or does not comply with the directions 
given under sub-section (2) or sub-section (3) of section 20, within such 
time as may be specified in the direction, shall, in respect of each such 
contravention or non-compliance, be liable to pay a penalty which shall not 
be less than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh 
rupees. 


(2) Where any person continues contravention or non-compliance 
under sub-section (/), he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of ten 
thousand rupees every day during which such contravention continues. 


6 of 974. 


Sec. ] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


4lA. (/) Whoever contravenes or does not comply with any order or 
direction issued under clause (c) of sub-section (/) of section 32 or any 
direction issued by a court under sub-section (2) of section 33 or any direction 
issued under section 33A, shall, in respect of each such contravention or non- 
compliance, be liable to pay the penalty which shall not be less than ten 
thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees. 


(2) Where any person continues contravention or non-compliance 
under sub-section (/), he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of ten 
thousand rupees every day during which such contravention continues.”. 


7. In section 42 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (/), for the long line, the following long line shall 
be substituted, namely:— 


“shall be liable to pay penalty which shall not be less than ten thousand 
rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees.”; 


(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


“(2) Where any person continues contravention or non-compliance 
under sub-section (/), he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of 
ten thousand rupees every day during which such contravention 
continues.”. 


8. For sections 43 and 44 of the principal Act, the following sections shall 


be substituted, namely:— 


“43. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 24, shall be liable 
to pay the penalty which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees, but 
which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees and where such contravention 
continues, he shall be liable to pay an additional penalty of ten thousand 
rupees every day during which such contravention continues. 


44. Where for the purpose of grant of a consent in pursuance of the 
provisions of section 25 or section 26, the use of a meter or gauge or other 
measure or monitoring device is required and such device is used for the 
purposes of those provisions, any person who knowingly or wilfully alters 
or interferes with that device so as to prevent it from monitoring or 
measuring correctly shall be liable to pay penalty which shall not be less 
than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees.”. 


9. Section 45 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 
0. For section 45A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be 


substituted, namely: — 


‘45A. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or 
any order or direction issued thereunder, for which no penalty has been 
provided for in this Act, shall be liable to pay the penalty which shall not be 
less than ten thousand rupees, but which may extend to fifteen lakh rupees, 
and where such contravention continues, he shall be liable to pay an 
additional penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees for every day 
during which such contravention continues. 


458. (7) The Central Government, for the purposes of determining the 
penalties under the provisions of this Act shall appoint an officer not below 
the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or a Secretary to the 


Failure to 
comply with 
provisions of 
section 32, or 
directions issued 
under section 33 
or section 33A. 


Amendment of 
section 42. 


Substitution of 
new sections for 
sections 43 and 
44, 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
provisions of 
section 24. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
section 25 or 
section 26. 


Omission of 
section 45. 


Substitution of 
new sections 
45A to 45E for 
section 45A. 


Penalty for 
contravention of 
certain 
provisions of 
Act. 


Adjudicating 
officer. 


Appeal. 


Penalty amount 
to be credited to 
Environmental 


Protection Fund. 


Offences for 
failure to 
comply with 
provisions of 
section 25 or 26 
and for failure 
to pay penalty. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— 


State Government to be the adjudicating officer, to hold an inquiry and to 
impose the penalty in the manner, as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the Central Government may appoint as many 
adjudicating officers as may be required. 


(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and enforce the attendance 
of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give 
evidence or to produce any document, which in the opinion of the 
adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to the subject-matter of 
the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person concerned 
has contravened the provisions of this Act, he may determine such penalty 
as he thinks fit under the provisions of this Act: 


Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed without giving the 
person concerned an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 


(3) The amount of penalty imposed under the provisions of 
sections 4, 4lA, 42, 43, 44, 45A and 48, shall be in addition to the liability 
to pay relief or compensation under section 5 read with section 7 of the 
National Green Tribunal Act, 200. 


45C. (४) Any person aggrieved by the order passed by the 
adjudicating officer under section 45B may prefer an appeal to the National 
Green Tribunal established under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal 
Act, 200. 


(2) Every appeal under sub-section (/) shall be filed within sixty days 
from the date on which the copy of the order made by the adjudicating 
officer is received by the aggrieved person. 


(3) The National Green Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the 
appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against. 


(4) Where an appeal is preferred against any order of the adjudicating 
officer under sub-section (/), such appeal shall not be entertained by the 
Tribunal unless such person has deposited with the Tribunal ten per cent. of 
the amount of the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer. 


45D. Where an adjudicating officer imposes penalty or additional 
penalty, as the case may be, under the provisions of this Act, the amount of 
such penalty shall be credited to the Environmental Protection Fund 
established under section |6 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 986. 


45E. (/) Whoever fails to comply with the provisions of section 25 or 
section 26, in respect of each such failure, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year and six 
months but which may extend to six years and with fine, and in case the 
failure continues, with an additional fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees for every day during which such failure continues after the conviction 
for the first such failure. 


(2) If the failure referred to in sub-section (/) continues beyond a 
period of one year after the date of conviction, the offender shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two 
years but which may extend to seven years and with fine. 


(3) Where any person fails to pay the penalty or the additional penalty, 
as the case may be, imposed under the provisions of this Act within ninety 
days of such imposition, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to 
twice the amount of the penalty or additional penalty so imposed or with 
both. 


9 of 200. 


9 of 200. 


29 of 986. 


Sec. ] 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 


(4) Where any offence under sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3) has been committed by a company, every person who, at 
the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of such 
offence and he shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly: 


Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment provided in sub-section (/) or sub-section (2) or 
sub-section (3), if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission 
of such offence. 


(5) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (4), where an offence has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any 
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of 
the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also 
have deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,— 


(a) “company” includes body corporate, firm, trust, society and 
any other association of individuals; 


(b) “director”, includes director of the company, partner of the 
firm, members of the society or trust or member of any association of 
individuals, as the case may be.’. 


. Section 47 of the principal Act shall be omitted. 


2. For section 48 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 


substituted, namely:— 


“48. (7) Where contravention of any provision of this Act has been 
committed by any Department of the Central Government or State 
Government, the Head of the Department shall be liable to pay the penalty 
equal to one month of his basic salary: 


Provided that such Head of the Department shall not be liable for such 
contravention, if he proves that the contravention was committed without 
his knowledge or instructions or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent such contravention. 


(2) Where any contravention under sub-section (/) is attributable to 
any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head of the 
Department, such officer shall be liable to pay the penalty equal to one 
month of his basic salary: 


Provided that such officer shall not be liable for the contravention, if 
he proves that he exercised all due diligence to avoid such contravention.” 


3. In section 49 of the principal Act, in sub-section (/), after clause (a), the 


following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(aa) the adjudicating officer or any officer authorised by him in this 
behalf; or”. 


Omission of 
section 47. 
Substitution of 
new section for 
section 48. 


Penalty for 
contravention 
by Government 
Department. 


Amendment of 
section 49, 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY __ [Part II— Sec. । | 


er of 4. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),— 
section श्र 


(i) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 


“(aa) the manner of nomination of the chairman of the State 
Board and the terms and conditions of service of the chairman of the 
State Board under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 4 and under 
sub-section (9) of section 5;”; 


(ii) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 


“(ma) the manner of holding inquiry and imposing penalties by 
the adjudicating officer under section 45B;”. 


Amendment of 5. In section 64 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (e), for 

ee the words, brackets and figures “the chairman and the member-secretary of the 
State Board under sub-section (9) of section 5 and”, the words “the member- 
secretary of the State Board” shall be substituted. 


DR. RAJIV MANI, 
Secretary to the Govt. of India. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-!0002 
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-!0054. 


K. S h itiz Pist2lysiones 


by Kshitiz Mohan 
Date: 2024.02.5 


MGIPMRND—74Gl(S3)—5-02-2024. Mohan toss23-0800 


