रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003—05 REGD. NO. 0. L. (५) 04/0007/2003—05 


Vita = राजपत्र 


Che Gazette of India 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-सा.-28092026-276544 
CG-DL-W-28092026-276544 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


सं. 15] नई दिल्ली, सितम्बर 13--सितम्बर 19, 2026, शनिवार/ ATX 22--भाद्र 28, 1948 
No. 15] NEW DELHI, SEPTEMBER 13— SEPTEMBER 19, 2026, SATURDAY/ BHADRA 22— BHADRA 28, 1948 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग 1--खण्ड 3—Sq-uvs (iii) 
PART I—Section 3—Sub-section (iii) 


केंद्रीय अधिकारियों (संघ राज्यक्षेत्र प्रशासनों को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए साधारण आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 


Orders and Notifications issued by the Central Authorities (Other than the Administrations of Union Territories) 


भारत निर्वाचन आयोग 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 10 सितम्बर, 2026 

आ.अ. 108.--लोक प्रतिनिधित्व अधिनियम, 1951 (1951 का 43) की धारा 106 के अनुसरण में, निर्वाचन 
आयोग वर्ष 2024 की निर्वाचन याचिका संख्या 3 में माननीय उच्च न्यायालय, इलाहाबाद (लखनऊ) के दिनांक 14 

अगस्त, 2024 के निर्णय को WaT प्रकाशित करता है | 

(संलग्न निर्णय यहाँ छापें) 

[फा. सं. 82/उ0प्र0-लो0स0/3/2024(लख.)] 
अजय कुमार वर्मा, सचिव 


6857 01/2026 (261) 


262 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : SEPTEMBER 12, 2026/ BHADRA 21, 1948 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 10th September, 2026 


O.N. 108.—In pursuance of Section 106 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951), the 
Election Commission hereby publishes the Judgement dated 147 August, 2024 of the Hon’ble High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad (Lucknow) in Election Petition No. 3 of 2024. 


(HERE PRINT THE JUDGEMENT ATTACHED) 
[F. No. 82/UP-HP/3/2024(LKO.)] 
AJAY KUMAR VERMA, Secy. 


HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD (LUCKNOW) 


Bie नर मर नर नर मर मंच नर 2s 2g न 2k 2k 2 नर 


A.F.R. 


Neutral Citation No. - 2024:AHC-LKO:56237 
Judgment reserved on 05.08.2024 
Judgment delivered on 14.08.2024 


Reserved 
Case :- ELECTION PETITION No. - 3 of 2024 
Petitioner :- Maneka Sanjay Gandhi 
Respondent :- Rambhual Nishad And Others 
Counsel for Petitioner :- Prashant Singh Atal, Amit Jaiswal Ojus Law, 
Dr. Pooja Singh, Vijay Vikram Singh 
ने मर मर नर नर मर मंच नर 2k 2k 2s सर 2 2 ok 
Hon'ble Rajan Roy, J. 


1. Heard Mr. Siddharth Luthra, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Prashant Singh Atal, Mr. Amit 
Jaiswal, Dr. Pooja Singh and Mr. Vijay Vikram Singh for the election-petitioner. 


2. This Election Petition has been filed by the petitioner-Maneka Sanjay Gandhi challenging election of the 
returned candidate-Rambhual Nishad as Member of Parliament from Sultanpur 38-Lok Sabha constituency and that 
the same be declared as null and void and be set aside. 


3. It is admitted case of the petitioner herein that the returned candidate was elected on 04.06.2024 and the 
result of was 


declared on 06.06.2024. This election petition has been filed on 27.07.2024. 


4. As per Section 81 of the Representation of People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred as 'Act 1951") such an 
election petition can be filed within 45 days from, but not earlier than the date of election of the returned candidate or 
if there are more than one returned candidate at the election and dates of their election are different, the later of those 
two dates. 


5. The election petition has apparently been filed beyond the period of 45 days prescribed in Section 81 of the 
Act 1951. Section 86 of the Act 1951 provides that the High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does not 
comply with the provision of Section 81 or Section 82 or Section 117 of the Act 1951. 


6. Apparently, Section 86 (1) of the Act 1951 referred hereinabove is mandatory and in the event an election 
petition is filed beyond the period of 45 days prescribed in Section 81 of the Act 1951 the High Court does not have 
any option but to dismiss the election petition in view of provision contained in Section 86 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii1)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 12, 2026/ भाद्र 21, 1948 263 


(1) of the Act 1951. There is no provision under the Act 1951 which permits condonation of such delay and extension 
of the 


limitation proscribed in Section 81 of the Act 1951 on any ground. 


th On being confronted, Mr. Luthra who joined the proceedings through Video Conferencing and argued the 
election petition submitted that the law has evolved and now Section 33-A has been added in the Act 1951 which 
requires a disclosure by the candidate about the criminal cases against him. The said provision gives a corresponding 
right to the elector etc. to information with regard to the person whom he is required to vote for. This right, according 
to him, is in fact part of the constitutional right as held in various decisions and in this context he relied upon 
decisions of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Vidyacharan Shukla vs. Khubchand Baghel and others; (1964) 6 SCR 
129, Hukumdev Narain Yadav vs. Lalit narain Mishra; (1974) 2 SCC 133, Hari Shanker Tripathi vs. Shiv Harsh and 
Others; (1976) 1 SCC 897, Mangu Ram vs. Municipal Corporation of Delhi; (1976) 1 SCC 392, Bengal Chemists & 
Druggists Assn. vs. Kalyan Chowdhury; (2018) 3 SCC 41, Krishnamoorthy vs. Sivakumar and others; (2015) 3 SCC 
467, Union of India vs. Assn. for Democratic Reforms and another; (2002) 5 SCC 294, People's Union for Civil 
Liberties (PUCL) and another vs. Union of India and 


another; (2003) 4 SCC 399, Lily Thomas vs. Union of India and others; (2013) 7 SCC 653, Resurgence India vs. 
Election Commission of India and another; (2014) 14 SCC 189, Public Interest Foundation and others vs. Union of 
India and another; (2019) 3 SCC 224, N. Balakrishnan vs. M. 


Krishnamurthy; (1998) 7 SCC 123 and Gopal Sardar vs. Karuna Sardar; (2004) 4 SCC 252. Relying upon the same, 
he also contended that much water has flown down the river and the law has evolved immensely since the decision in 
the case of Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) and the said decision as also the later decisions following it had not 
taken into consideration the insertion of Section 33-A in the Act 1951 and its impact. His submission was that the 
returned candidate had not disclosed four criminal cases pending against him and had submitted a false affidavit. It 
was also his submission that limitation should not legalize such illegal non-disclosures, as, ultimately the election was 
to the Parliament of India and considering the consequences on the functioning of the polity this by itself should be a 
ground for entertaining the election petition and for this Court to decide the same on merits. 


8. The issue which has arisen in this election petition is no longer res integra. A three Judge Bench of Hon’ble 
Supreme 


Court of India in the case of Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) had the occasion to consider the same. Question of 
applicability of Section 5 of the Limitation Act to an election petition was specifically an issue before the Supreme 
Court in the said case, apart from other issues involved. It is, therefore, fruitful to refer to relevant extracts of the said 
judgment, especially as the Supreme Court also considered the provision of Section 86 (2) of the Act 1951 and its 
impact on the election petition in the said context. It held as under: 


"16. In K. Venkateswara Rao and Anr. v. Bekkam Narasimha Reddi & Ors.; AIR 1969 SC 872 to which we 
shall refer more fully later, Vidyacharan Shukla's case (supra) was attempted to be pressed into service, but this 
Court repelled it and observed at pp. 688-689: 


"In our view, the situation now obtaining in an appeal to this Court from an order of the High Court is 
entirely different. There is no section in the Act as it now stands which equates an order made by the High 
Court under Section 98 or Section 99 to a decree passed by a Civil court subordinate to the High Court. 
An appeal being a creature of a statute, the rights conferred on the appellant must be found within the four 
corners of the Act. Sub-Section (2) of the present Section 116-A expressly gives this Court the discretion 
and authority to entertain an appeal after the expiry of the period of thirty days. No right is however given 
to the High Court to entertain an election petition which does not comply with the provisions of Section 
81, Section 82 or Section 117." 


17. Though Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act has been made applicable to appeals both under the Act as 
well as under the Code of Criminal Procedure, no case has been brought to our notice where Section 29(2) has 
been made applicable to an election petition filed under Section 81 of 


the Act by virtue of which either Sections 4, 5 or 12 of the Limitation Act has been attracted. Even assuming 
that where a period of limitation has not been fixed for election petitions in the Schedule to the Limitation Act 
which is different from that fixed under Section 81 of the Act, Section 29 (2) would be attracted, and what we 
have to determine is whether the provisions of this section are expressly excluded in the case of an election 
petition. It is contended before us that the words "expressly excluded" would mean that there must be an express 
reference made in the special or local law to the specific provisions of the Limitation Act of which the operation 
is to be excluded. As usual the meaning given in the Dictionary has been relied upon, but what we have to see is 
whether the scheme of the special law, that is in this case the Act, and the nature of the remedy provided therein 
are such that the Legislature intended it to be a complete code by itself which alone should govern the several 
matters provided by it. If on an examination of the relevant provisions it is clear that the provisions of the 
Limitation Act are necessarily excluded, then the benefits conferred therein cannot be called in aid to 


264 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : SEPTEMBER 12, 2026/ BHADRA 21, 1948 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


supplement the provisions of the Act. In our view, even in a case where the special law does not exclude the 
provisions of Sections 4 to 24 of the Limitation Act by an express reference, it would nonetheless be open to the 
Court to examine whether and to what extent the nature of those provisions or the nature of the subject-matter 
and scheme of the special law exclude their operation. The provisions of Section 3 of the Limitation Act that a 
suit instituted, appeal preferred and application made after the prescribed period shall be dismissed are provided 
for in Section 86 of the Act which gives a peremptory command that the High Court shall dismiss an election 
petition which does not comply with the provisions of Sections 81, 82 or 117. It will be seen that Section 81 is 
not the only section mentioned in Section 86, and if the Limitation Act were to apply to an election petition 
under Section 81 it should equally apply to Sections 82 and 117 because under Section 86 the High Court 
cannot say that by an application of Section 5 of the Limitation Act, Section 81 is complied with while no such 
benefit is available in dismissing an application for non-compliance with the provisions of Sections 82 and 
117 of the Act, or 


alternatively if the provisions of the Limitation Act do not apply to Section 82 and Section 117 of the Act, it 
cannot be said that they apply to s. 81. Again, s. 6 of the Limitation Act which provides for the extension of the 
period of limitation till after the disability in the case of a person who is either a minor or insane or an idiot is 
inapplicable to, an election petition. Similarly, Sections. 7 to 24 are in terms inapplicable to the proceedings 
under the Act, particularly in respect of the filing of election petitions and their trial." 


9. Hon'ble the Supreme Court opined in the said case that the applicability of the provisions of the 
Limitation Act by virtue of Section 29 (2) thereof is to be judged not from the terms of the limitation Act but by 
the provisions of the Act relating to filing of election petition and their trial to ascertain as to wherein it is 
complete code in itself which does not admit application of any provisions of the Limitation Act mentioned in 
Section 29 (2) of that Act. 


10. Referring to various earlier decisions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India including those wherein it has 
been held that the Act 1951 was a complete Code and also taking into consideration various amendments made 
by the Legislature in the said Act, especially Section 81 thereof, and the earlier existing Section 85 which 
empowered the Election Commission in its discretion to condone the delay in presentation of the election 
petition and also taking into consideration the decision of Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Charan Lal 
Sahu vs. 


Nand Kishor Bhatt; 1973 (2) SCC 530 wherein it had been held that there is no question of any common law 
right to challenge an election as such any discretion to condone the delay in presentation of the petition or to 
absolve the petitioner from payment of security for costs can only be provided under the statute governing 
election disputes and if no such discretion was conferred in respect of any of these matters none can be 
exercised under any general law or any principles of equity and if for non compliance of the provisions of 
Section 82 and 117 which is mandatory, the election petition has to be dismissed under Section 86 (1) of the Act 
1951, presentation of election petition within the period prescribed in Section 81 of the Act 1951 would be 
equally mandatory, non-compliance of which visits the penalty of the petition being dismissed, it was held, for 
all the reasons mentioned, therein that provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation Act do not govern the filing of 
election petitions or their trial. 


11. It also considered the plea that if the petitions were to be dismissed allegation of serious corrupt practices 
cannot be inquired into and purity of the elections cannot be maintained and found the answer to this plea in the 
judgment of Justice G.K. Mitter in K. Venkateswara Rao and Anr. v. Bekkam Narasimha Reddi & Ors.; AIR 
1969 SC 872 wherein his 


Lordship opined that this is however a matter which can be set right only by the Legislature. It is worthy of note 
that although the Act has been amended on several occasions, a provision like Section 86(1) as it now stands 
has always been on the statute book but whereas in the Act of 1951 the discretion was given to the Election 
Commission, to entertain a petition beyond the period fixed if it was satisfied as to the cause for delay no such 
saving clause is to be found now. The legislature in its wisdom has made the observance of certain formalities 
and provisions obligatory and failure in that respect can only be visited with a dismissal of the petition. 


12. Their Lordships also took into consideration that since the decision in K. Venkateswara Rao (supra) 
decided in August, 1968, though the Parliament has made certain amendments in the Act 1969, it has not 
considered it necessary to amend the Act to confer, on persons challenging the election, benefits similar to those 
available to them under the proviso to the repealed Section 85 of the Act 1951, for, as it did not want delays to 
occur in the disposal of election petitions as in the past. Under the repealed Section 85 there was a provision for 
condonation of delay in filing election petition but there is no such provision in the Act 1951 existing as of now. 


13. Itis not out of place to mention that in Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra), Hon’ble the Supreme Court also 
considered the constitution bench judgment in the case of Vidyacharan Shukla (supra). 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 12, 2026/ भाद्र 21, 1948 265 


14... Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) has been followed in various later decisions such as 1976 (1) SCC 897 
(Harishankar Tripathi vs. Shiv Harsh and others); 2018 (9) SCC 808 (Suman Devi vs. Manisha Devi and 
others). 


15. Another three Judge Bench of Hon’ble the Supreme Court in Lachhman Das Arora vs. Ganeshi Lal and 
others; 1999 (8) SCC 532 construed the provisions of Section 81 (1) of the Act 1951 and has held as under: 


"7. On its plain reading, Section 81(1) lays down that an election petition calling in question any election may 
be presented on one or more of the grounds specified in sub-section (1) of Section 100 and Section 101 of the 
Act to the High Court by any candidate at such election or by an elector within forty-five days from, but not 
earlier than, the date of election of the returned candidate, or if there are more than one returned candidate at the 
election and the dates of their election are different, the later of those two dates. The Act is a special code 
providing a period of limitation for filing of an election petition. No period for filing of an election petition is 
prescribed under the Indian Limitation Act. The Act insofar as it relates to presentation and trial of election 
disputes is a complete code and a special law. The scheme of the special law shows that the provisions of 
Sections 4 to 24 of the Indian Limitation Act do not apply. If an election petition is not filed within the 
prescribed period of forty-five days, Section 86(1) of the 


Act, which provides that the High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the 
provisions of Section 81 or Section 82 or Section 117, is straightaway attracted." 


This decision has been followed in the subsequent decision in Suman Devi (supra). 


16. From the aforesaid discussion it is apparent that the Limitation Act, 1963, especially Section 5 thereof, is 
not applicable to election petitions. In fact, the applicability appears to be specifically excluded in view of the 
provision of Section 86 


(1) of the Act 1951 which makes it mandatory for the High Court/ Election Judge to dismiss the election 
petition if it is not in conformity with the provision of Section 81 of the Act 1951. 


17. It is not out of place to mention that the High Court while hearing an election petition operates as an 
Authority under Article 329 (b) of the Constitution of India whose jurisdiction is circumscribed by the statutory 
provisions contained in the Act 1951. The legal position in this regard has been settled by a three Judge Bench 
in the case of Thampanoor Ravi vs. Charupara Ravi and Others; (1999) 8 SCC 74. The said judgment has been 
followed by a Division Bench of this Court on a reference made by a learned Single Judge in the context of an 
election petition bearing Election Petition No. 7 of 2022 


(Sheshmani Nath Tripathi (S.N. Tripathi In Short) vs. Shri Dinesh Rawat, The Returned Candidate. The High 
Court while hearing an election petition does not function as a Constitutional Court per se nor does it have 
extraordinary constitutional or inherent powers as has been held in Thampanoor Ravi (supra) and the Division 
Bench of this Court in Sheshmani Nath Tripathi (supra), therefore, the contention of Mr. Luthra that the 
violation of constitutional right to right to information should be considered is not acceptable. Unless and until 
the election petition is maintainable and is not barred by limitation, the merits of the matter cannot be 
considered. In fact such a plea has already been considered in Hukumdev Narain Yadav (supra) with reference 
to opinion of Justice Mitter in K. Venkateswara Rao's case as already referred earlier. 


18. For all these reasons, this election petition being barred by Section 81 read with Section 86 of the Act 
1951 and Order VII Rule 11(d) of the Code of Civil Procedure is liable to be dismissed. It is accordingly 
dismissed. 


RAJAN ROY, J 
Order Date :- 14.08.2024 


अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्‍ली, 10 सितम्बर, 2026 
आ.अ. 109.--लोक प्रतिनिधित्व अधिनियम, 1951 (1951 का 43) की धारा 106 के अनुसरण में, निर्वाचन 


आयोग वर्ष 2024 की निर्वाचन याचिका संख्या 4 में माननीय उच्च न्यायालय, इलाहाबाद के दिनांक 31 मार्च, 2026 के 
निर्णय को एतट्दारा प्रकाशित करता है। 


(संलग्न निर्णय यहाँ छापें) 


266 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : SEPTEMBER 12, 2026/ BHADRA 21, 1948 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


[फा. सं. 82/उ0प्र0-लो0स0/4/2024(इला.)] 


अजय कुमार वर्मा, सचिव 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 10th September, 2026 
O.N. 109.—In pursuance of Section 106 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951), the 
Election Commission hereby publishes the Judgement dated 317 March, 2026 of the Hon’ble High Court of 
Judicature at Allahabad in Election Petition No. 4 of 2024. 

(HERE PRINT THE JUDGEMENT ATTACHED) 
[F. No. 82/UP-HP/4/2024(Alld.)] 
AJAY KUMAR VERMA, Secy. 


IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD 


Bis नर 3s 2s नर से सर नर 2k सर oi ok 


ELECTION PETITION NO. 4 OF 2024 
(Under Section 80/81 of Representation of People Act, 1951) 
(DISTRICT : RAMPUR) 


Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi, Son of Late Doli Ram Lodhi, 
Resident of Village Khairullapur, Post Bhot, 
Rampur City, District Rampur. 


an------ Petitioner 
Versus 
Mohibbullah Son of Mohammad Ali, Resident of Village Raza 
Nagar, Tehsil Swar, District Rampur. 
a------- Respondent 
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD 
ELECTION PETITION No. - 4 of 2024 
Ghanshyam Singh Lodhi 
.... Petitioner(s) 
Versus 
Mohibbullah 
.... Respondent(s) 
Counsel for Petitioner(s) ‘Tn Person, Madhur Prakash, Sharad Sharma 
Counsel for Respondent(s) : Narendra Kumar Pandey 


Reserved On:12.2.2026 
Delivered On:31.3.2026 


Court No. — 55 


HON'BLE CHANDRA KUMAR RAL, J. 
In Re: Civil Misc. Application No.4 of 2025 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 12, 2026/ भाद्र 21, 1948 267 


1. Heard Mr. Narendra Kumar Pandey, learned counsel for the applicant/respondent on the Application under 
Order 7 Rule 11 of Civil Procedure Code, 1908 and Mr. Madhur Prakash, learned counsel for the election petitioner. 


22 The instant application has been filed on behalf of respondent/ Mohibullah under Order 7 Rule 11 of Civil 
Procedure Code, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as "C.P.C.") with the prayer that election petition be dismissed as it 
does not disclose any cause of action. 


3. This Court granted time to learned counsel for the election petitioner to file reply accordingly, reply has been 
filed on behalf of election petitioner. 


4 By means of instant election petition, election petitioner has challenged the election of respondent / 
Mohibullah as Member of Parliament from 07 Rampur Parliamentary Constituency of District- Rampur on the ground 
of Commission of corrupt practice under Section 123 (7) of The Representation of People Act, 1951 (hereinafter 
referred to as "R.P. Act") and non-compliance of the provision of Section 33 and 33 (4) of R.P. Act as well as on the 
ground of improper acceptance of nomination paper of returned candidate. 


3: Mr. Narendra Kumar Pandey, learned counsel for the applicant/ respondent / Mohibullah submitted that the 
election petition is bereft of material facts and does not disclose any cause of action. He further submitted that the 
averment made in the election petition do not amount to alleging or stating any ground for setting aside the election, 
as such, election petition should be dismissed on the ground of provisions contained under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. 
He further submitted that election petition contains vague, general and misconceived allegations which do not amount 
to alleging or stating any material fact, as such, the election petition should be dismissed on the basis of provisions 
contained under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. He further submitted that the ground has been taken in the election petition 
for improper acceptance of nomination paper of returned candidate but there is no pleading as to how the election is 
materially affected. He further submitted that perusal of document which is annexed at page no.97 & 98 of the 
election petition clearly demonstrate that the name of respondent/ Mohibullah was corrected in the electoral roll but 
election petitioner is making misconceived statement for making roving inquiry in the matter. He further submitted 
that notarial affidavit of respondent dated 27.3.2024 & 28.3.2024 very much demonstrate that there is no illegality in 
the acceptance of nomination paper of respondent. He further submitted that Rule 8 of the Conduct of Election Rules, 
1961 (hereinafter referred to as "Conduct of Election Rules") prescribed that if a candidate name is incorrectly spelt or 
incorrectly shown then before list of contesting candidate is clear, can furnish in writing to the returning officer in 
proper form and spelling of his name, therefore, the averment made in Para nos.12 to 18 of the election petition are 
totally misconceived and does not construe any cause of action. He further submitted that affidavit in form 26 of the 
returned candidate filed at page nos.48 to 64 of the election petition clearly demonstrate that answering respondent 
has disclosed of his pending criminal cases, as such, there is no question of concealment of any information relating 
to pending criminal cases. He further submitted that in paragraph nos.24 to 26 of the election petition statement has 
been made that since returning officer improperly accepted the nomination paper of respondent, therefore, committed 
corrupt practice under Section 123 (7) of R.P. Act but while reading the contents of para nos.24 to 26 of the election 
petition along with provisions of Section 123 (7) of R.P. Act it is clear that there is no pleading of consent in the 
entire paragraph of the election petition, therefore, filing of election petition on the basis of grounds setup in the 
petition is abuse of process of law and the same is liable to be dismissed under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. He further 
submitted that pleading in the election petition from para nos.7 to 26 are frivolous and irrelevant as well as does not 
disclose any cause of action, as such, the application filed under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. on behalf of respondent 
should be allowed. He placed reliance on the following judgements of Apex Court as well as this Court in support of 
his argument: 


";, AIR 2020 supreme court 3310, Dahiben versus Arvindbhai kalyanji bhanusali (gajra) (0) Thr Lrs and others. 
ii. 2025 SCC Online SC 1723, Ajmera Shyam versus Kova Laxmi and others. 

ili. AIR 1969 SC 1201, Samant N. Balakrishna etc. versus George Fernandez and others etc. 

iv. AIR 1986 SC 1253, Azhar Hussain versus Rajiv Gandhi. 

v. AIR 1977 SC 2421, T. Arivandandam versus T.c V. Satyapal and another. 

vi. AIR 1982 SC 983, Jyoti Bsu and other versus Debi Ghosal and others. 

vii. AIR 1987 ALLAHABAD 279, Ram Autar Shastri versus Khursid Alam Khan and another. 

vill. Writ 8 2910 of 2018, Phool Chand (deceased) through L/R and others versus D.D.C." 


6. On the other hand, Mr. Madhur Prakash, learned counsel for the election petitioner submitted that the 
application filed under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. is totally misconceived, as such, the same is liable to be rejected. He 
further submitted that the proper averment has been made in the election petition and proper ground has been taken 
for declaring the election of respondent as null & void. He further submitted that in view of the averment made in the 
election petition and ground taken in the election petition, application under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. filed by 


268 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : SEPTEMBER 12, 2026/ BHADRA 21, 1948 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


respondent cannot be allowed rather election petition should be decided on merit after framing issues and giving 
opportunity to parties to lead evidence in accordance with law. He placed the provisions of R.P. Act in order to 
demonstrate that the election petition has been rightly filed to set aside the election of respondent and declaring the 
election as null & void. He placed reliance upon the following judgements in support of his argument: 


"1. Election Petition No. 4 of 2017 Jay Veer Singh versus Hari om Yadav. 

2. Election Petition No. 9 of 2012 Raj kumar Singh versus Vijay Kumar Misra and others. 

3. AIR 2016 SC 3282, R K Roja Versus U S Rayudu & Another." 

7. Ihave considered the argument advanced by learned counsel for the parties and perused the records. 
8. 


In order to appreciate the controversy involved in the matter and for deciding the application under Order 7 
Rule 11 C.P.C., provision relating to Contents of Election Petition as provided under Section 83 of R.P. Act, 
provision relating to trial of Election Petition as provided under Section 86 of R.P. Act and provision relating to 
procedure for deciding the Election Petition as provided under Section 87 of R.P. Act will be relevant for perusal 
which are as under:- 


83. Contents of petition.—(1) An election petition.— 
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies; 
(b) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as full a statement 


as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practice and the date and place of the 
commission of each such practice; and 


(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings: 


[Provided that where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit 
in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt practice and the particulars thereof. ] 


(2) Any schedule or annexure to the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as 
the petition]. 


86. Trial of election petitions. 


[(1) The High Court shall dismiss an election petition which does not comply with the provisions of section 81 or 
section 82 or section 117. 


Explanation.—An order of the High Court dismissing an election petition under this sub-section shall be deemed to 
be an order made under clause (a) of section 98. 


(2) As soon as may be after an election petition has been presented to the High Court, it shall be referred to the 
Judge or one of the Judges who has or have been assigned by the Chief Justice for the trial of election petitions under 
sub-section (2) of section 80A. 


(3) Where more election petitions than one are presented to the High Court in respect of the same election, all of 
them shall be referred for trial to the same Judge who may, in his discretion, try them separately or in one or more 
groups. 


(4) Any candidate not already a respondent shall, upon application made by him to the High Court within 
fourteen days from the date of commencement of the trial and subject to any order as to security for costs which may 
be made by the High Court, be entitled to be joined as a respondent. 


Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section and of section 97, the trial of a petition shall be deemed to 
commence on the date fixed for the respondents to appear before the High Court and answer the claim or claims made 
in the petition. 


(5) The High Court may, upon such terms as to costs and otherwise as it may deem fit, allow the particulars of 
any corrupt practice alleged in the petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as may in its opinion be 
necessary for ensuring a fair and effective trial of the petition, but shall not allow any amendment of the petition 
which will have the effect of introducing particulars of a corrupt practice not previously alleged in the petition. 


(6) The trial of an election petition shall, so far as is practicable consistently with the interests of justice in 
respect of the trial, be continued from day to day until its conclusion, unless the High Court finds the adjournment of 
the trial beyond the following day to be necessary for reasons to be recorded. 


(7) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to conclude 
the trial within six months from the date on which the election petition is presented to the High Court for trial. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 12, 2026/ भाद्र 21, 1948 269 


Section 87. Procedure before the High Court. 


(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, every election petition shall be tried 
by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) to the trial of suits: 


Provided that the High Court shall have the discretion to refuse, for reasons to be recorded in writing, to examine any 
witness or witnesses if it is of the opinion that the evidence of such witness or witnesses is not material for the 
decision of the petition or that the party tendering such witness or witnesses is doing so on frivolous grounds or with a 
view to delay the proceedings. 


(2) The provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to apply in all respects to the trial of an election petition. ] 


9, Perusal of Section 33 (1) (2) (3) (4) and Section 123 (7) of R.P. Act will be also relevant which are 
as under:- 


"33. Presentation of nomination paper and requirements for a valid nomination. 


(1) On or before the date appointed under clause (a) of section 30 each candidate shall, either in person or by his 
proposer, between the hours of eleven O'clock in the forenoon and three O'clock in the afternoon deliver to the 
returning officer at the place specified in this behalf in the notice issued under section 31 a nomination paper 
completed in the prescribed form and signed by the candidate and by an elector of the constituency as proposer: 


Provided that a candidate not set up by a recognised political party, shall not be deemed to be duly nominated for 
election form a constituency unless the nomination paper is subscribed by ten proposers being electors of the 
constituency: 


Provided further that no nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer on a day which is a public 
holiday: 


Provided also that in the case of a local authorities’ constituency, graduates' constituency or teachers' constituency, the 
reference to an elector of the constituency as proposer shall be construed as a reference to ten per cent. of the electors 
of the constituency or ten such electors, whichever is less, as proposers. | 


(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), for election to the Legislative Assembly of Sikkim 
(deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of that State duly constituted under the Constitution), the nomination paper to 
be delivered to the returning officer shall be in such form and manner as may be prescribed: 


Provided that the said nomination paper shall be subscribed by the candidate as assenting to the nomination, and 


(a) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Bhutia-Lepcha origin, also by at least twenty electors of the 
constituency as proposers and twenty electors of the constituency as seconders; 


(b) in the case of a seat reserved for Sanghas, also by at least twenty electors of the constituency as proposers 
and at least twenty electors of the constituency as seconders; 


(c) in the case of a seat reserved for Sikkimese of Nepali origin, by an elector of the constituency as proposer: 


Provided further that no nomination paper shall be delivered to the returning officer on a day which is a public 
holiday. ] 


(2) In a constituency where any seat is reserved, a candidate shall not be deemed to be qualified to be chosen to 
fill that seat unless his nomination paper contains a declaration by him specifying the particular caste or tribe of which 
he is a member and the area in relation to which that caste or tribe is a Scheduled Caste or, as the case may be, a 
Scheduled Tribe of the State. 


(3) Where the candidate is a person who, having held any office referred to in 4[section 9] has been dismissed 
and a period of five years has not elapsed since the dismissal, such person shall not be deemed to be duly nominated 
as a candidate unless his nomination paper is accompanied by a certificate issued in the prescribed manner by the 
Election Commission to the effect that he has not been dismissed for corruption or disloyalty to the State. 


(4) On the presentation of a nomination paper, the returning officer shall satisfy himself that the names and 
electoral roll numbers of the candidate and his proposer as entered in the nomination paper are the same as those 
entered in the electoral rolls: 


Provided that no misnomer or inaccurate description or clerical, technical or printing error in regard to the name of the 
candidate or his proposer or any other person, or in regard to any place, mentioned in the electoral roll or the 
nomination paper and no clerical, technical or printing error in regard to the electoral roll numbers of any such person 
in the electoral roll or the nomination paper, shall affect the full operation of the electoral roll or the nomination paper 


270 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : SEPTEMBER 12, 2026/ BHADRA 21, 1948 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


with respect to such person or place in any case where the description in regard to the name of the person or place is 
such as to be commonly understood; and the returning officer shall permit any such misnomer or inaccurate 
description or clerical, technical or printing error to be corrected and where necessary, direct that any such misnomer, 
inaccurate description, clerical, technical or printing error in the electoral roll or in the nomination paper shall be 
overlooked. | 


Section 123 of Representation of People Act, 1951 


Section 123. Corrupt practices.The following shall be deemed to be corrupt practices for the purposes of 
this Act:-- 


(7) The obtaining or procuring or a betting or attempting to obtain or procure by a candidate or his agent or, by any 
other person 11 [with the consent of a candidate or his election agent], any assistance (other than the giving of vote) 
for the furtherance of the prospects of that candidates election, 14 [from any person whether or not in the service of 
the Government] and belonging to any of the following classes, namely:-- 


(a) gazetted officers; 

(b) stipendiary judges and magistrates; 

(c) members of the armed forces of the Union; 

(d) members of the police forces; 

(e) excise officers; 

(f) revenue officers other than village revenue officers known as lambardars malguzars, patels, deshmukhs or by 


any other name, whose duty is to collect land revenue and who are remunerated by a share of, or commission on, the 
amount of land revenue collected by them but who do not discharge any police functions; and 


(g) such other class of persons in the service of the Government as may be prescribed: 


Provided that where any person, in the service of the Government and belonging to any of the classes aforesaid, in the 
discharge or puported discharge of his official duty, makes any arrangements or provides any facilities or does any 
other act or thing, for, to, or in relation to, any candidate or his agent or any other person acting with the consent of 
the candidate or his election agent, (whether by reason of the office held by the candidate or for any other reason), 
such arrangements facilities or act or thing shall not be deemed to be assistance for the furtherance of the prospects of 
that candidates election]; 


(h) class of persons in the service of a local authority, university, government company or institution or concern 
or undertaking appointed or deputed by the Election Commission in connection with the conduct of elections. ] 


10. In view of the provision contained under Section 83 of R.P. Act as quoted above it is very much established 
that Election Petition shall contain statement of material fact on which petitioner relies and full particulars of any 
corrupt practice that petitioner alleges including full statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have 
committed such practice as well as date and place of the commission of each such practice. 


11. Section 87 of R.P. Act provides for applicability of provision of C.P.C., as such, provision Order 7 Rule 11 
C.P.C. will be applicable in the Election Petition. 


12. So far as scope of Election law are concern Apex Court in the case of Jyoti Basu (supra) has held that an 
election petition is not an action at common law nor in equity. It has also been held that it is a special jurisdiction and 
a special jurisdiction has always to be exercised in accordance with the statute creating it. 


13, This Court in the recent case reported in 2025 SCC OnLine All 3279, Prempal Singh vs. Prempal Singh 
Dhangar and 12 Others has dismissed the Election Petition for non-disclosure of cause of action on the basis of 
application filed under Order 7 Rule 11 (a) of C.P.C. 


Paragraph nos.41 & 42 of the judgement rendered in Prempal Singh (supra) will be relevant for perusal which is as 
under:- 


"41. Order VII Rule 11(a) clearly provides for rejection of a plaint in case of non disclosure of cause of action. 
Similarly, in an election petition, if the petitioner does not disclose the material fact, it leads to an inevitable 
conclusion that an incomplete cause of action has been set up and the petition become bad and liable to be dismissed. 
The defect is not curable as it leads to the root of the case, while it is not the same in case of non disclosure of entire 
material particulars. 


42. Thus, looking from this angle, the amendment application moved by petitioner cannot be allowed as it introduces 
totally a new case. The argument advanced by petitioner's counsel that Section 86(1) does not envisage a case of 
dismissal as only non compliance of Section 81, 82 or 117 would lead to dismissal of an election petition is totally 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(iii)] भारत का राजपत्र : सितम्बर 12, 2026/ भाद्र 21, 1948 271 
misconceived. Non disclosure of material fact is an incurable defect which leads to an inevitable conclusion that an 
election petition is not maintainable." 


14. It is material to mention that Section 33-A of R.P. Act provide for filing an affidavit in Form 20 as provided 
under Rule 4-A of the Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 by a candidate in election along with the nomination paper 
which has been properly followed by applicant/ respondent. The affidavit of applicant/ respondent is annexed along 
with election petition which fully demonstrate that from pancard upto revenue record including bank record, the name 
of candidate is mentioned as Mohibullah. So far as mentioning of the name of Mohabe Ali in electoral list is concern, 
applicant/ respondent has filed an affidavit dated 28.3.2024 before District Election Officer, which is as under:- 


सेवा में, 
श्रीमान जिला निर्वाचन अधिकारी महोदय, जनपद रामपुर। 
शपथ पत्र 


मिनजानिव मोहिब्बुल्लाह पुत्र मोहम्मद अली निवासी ग्राम रजानगर तहसील सवार जिला रामपुर का हूं जो कि शपथपूर्वक 
निम्नलिखित बयान करता हूं:- 


1. यह कि हालिफ उपरोक्त पते का निवासी है। 

2 यह कि हालिफ ने 7 लोकसभा निर्वाचन क्षेत्र रामपुर से समाजवादी पार्टी प्रत्याशी के रूप में आवेदन किया है। 
3. यह कि हालिफ ग्राम रजानगर विधानसभा 35 चमरव्वा, तहसील सवार जिला रामपुर का निवासी है। 
4 


यह कि हालिफ के वोट लिस्ट ग्राम रजानगर, विधानसभा 35 चमरव्वा तहसील सवार रामपुर में HATH सं0-454 

भाग सं0-9 में नाम मौहब्बे अली पुत्र मौ० अली मकान सं0-100 अंकित है, हालिफ ने अपने नाम में संशोधन करा लिया है 

तथा वोटर लिस्ट में भी संशोधन कराया था परन्तु जिला निर्वाचन कार्यालय से जो हालिफ की सत्यप्रतिलिपि जारी हुई है 

उसमें नाम मौहब्बे अली आ रहा है जबकि जो हालिफ ने ऑनलाईन पहचान पत्र नेट से निकाला है, उसमें हालिफ का नाम 
मोहिब्बुल्लाह पुत्र गोहम्मद अली आ रहा है, हालिफ का सही नाम मोहिब्बुल्लाह है। 


5. यह कि दोनों नाम ही हालिफ के ही है। 
हालिफ 


मोहिब्बुल्लाह 


सत्यापन: उपरोक्त शपथ पत्र का पैरा नं0-1 ता 5 मेरे निजी ज्ञान व विश्वास के अनुसार सही व सत्य है। इसमें न कुछ झूठ है 
और न ही कुछ छिपाया पाया गया है जिसकी तस्दीक आज दिनांक 28.03.2024 को जिला कचहरी रामपुर में की गई। 


ईश्वर मेरी Aas करे। 
हालिफ 


मोहिब्बुल्लाह” 


15. Perusal of Paragraph nos. 24, 25 & 26 of the election petition will be relevant which is as under:- 


"24. That the Returning Officer illegally accepted the nomination paper of the respondent which was not filed in 
consonance with the provisions contained Under Section 33 of R.P. Act without assigning any reasons/satisfaction 
about the different name of the respondent mentioned in the voter list under the influence and undue pressure of the 
respondent which amounts to be a corrupt practice as defined Under Section 123(7) of the R.P. Act. 


25. That the aforesaid corrupt practice has been committed by the respondent himself, his workers and 
supporters with the consent of the Returning Officer. 


272 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : SEPTEMBER 12, 2026/ BHADRA 21, 1948 [PART II—SEC. 3(iii)] 


26. That in the aforesaid manner, the respondent has committed corrupt practice, for the furtherance of prospects 
of his election, as contemplated Under Section 123(7) of the R.P. Act as detailed in the preceding paragraphs of this 
election petition and as such the election of the respondent is void and is liable to be declared void." 


16. Perusal of the averment made in Paragraph Nos.4 to 26 of Election Petition specially paragraph nos.24, 25 & 
26 as quoted above fully demonstrate that there is no compliance of the mandatory provisions contained under 
Sections 83 (1) (a), 83 (1) (b) of R.P. Act which will be fatal for Election Petition. 


17. Apex Court in the case of T. Arivandandam (supra) in respect to matter under Order 7 Rule 11 of C.P.C. 
arising out of civil suit has held that trial Court should insist imperatively on examining the party at the first hearing 
so that bogus litigation can be shot down at the earliest stage. Paragraph no.5 of the judgement rendered in T. 
Arivandandam (supra) will be relevant for perusal which is as under:- 


"5. We have not the slightest hesitation in condemning the petitioner for the gross abuse of the process of the court 
repeatedly and unrepentently resorted to. From the statement of the facts found in the judgment of the High Court, it 
is perfectly plain that the suit now pending before the First Munsif's Court, Bangalore, is a flagrant misuse of the 
mercies of the law in receiving plaints. The learned Munsif must remember that if on a meaningful — not formal - 
reading of the plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, he 
should exercise his power under Order 7, Rule 11 CPC taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein is 
fulfilled. And, if clever drafting has created the illusion of a cause of action, nip it in the bud at the first hearing by 
examining the party searchingly under Order 10, CPC. An activist Judge is the answer to irresponsible law suits. The 
trial courts would insist imperatively on examining the party at the first hearing so that bogus litigation can be shot 
down at the earliest stage. The Penal Code is also resourceful enough to meet such men, (Cr. XI) and must be 
triggered against them. In this case, the learned Judge to his cost realised what George Bernard Shaw remarked on the 
assassination of Mahatma Gandhi: 


"It is dangerous to be too good." 


18. Considering the aforementioned facts and circumstances of the case, the application under Order 7 Rule 11 
of C.P.C. is allowed and election petition is dismissed for non-disclosure of any cause action. 


CHANDRA KUMAR RAL J 
March 31, 2026 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 
VINOD ४1002 
KUMAR tseizvo330 


