रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल. (एन) 04/0007/2003—05 REGD. NO. D. L. 0५) 04/0007/2003—05 


ANd = राजपनत्र 


Che Gazette of Jndia 


OG. -SY. Wer. -FT.-42024-258642 
CG-DL-W-42024-258642 


प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


साप्ताहिक 
WEEKLY 


सं. 44] नई दिल्ली, नवम्बर 3--नवम्बर 9, 2024, शनिवार/कार्तिक i2—arfts 8, 946 
No. 44] NEW DELHI, NOVEMBER 3—NOVEMBER 9, 2024, SATURDA Y/KARTIKA 2—KARTIKA 8, 946 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह पृथक संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके 
Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation 


भाग Ii—avs ३---उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 


भारत सरकार के मंत्रालयों (TAT मंत्रालय को छोड़कर) द्वारा जारी किए गए सांविधिक आदेश और अधिसूचनाएं 
Statutory Orders and Notifications Issued by the Ministries of the Government of India 
(Other than the Ministry of Defence) 


विदेश मन्त्रालय 
(सी.पी.वी. प्रभाग) 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2035.---राजनयिक और कोंसुलीय अधिकारी (शपथ एवं फीस) के अधिनियम, 4948 की धारा 2 के 
खंड (क) के अनुसरण में वैधानिक आदेश | 


UdERT, सरकार भारत के दूतावास, बहरीन में सुश्री श्रुति तिवारी, सहायक अनुभाग अधिकारी, को 
अक्टूबर 30, 2024 से सहायक कांसुलर अधिकारी के रूप में कांसुलर सेवाओं का निर्वहन करने के लिए अधिकृत करती है। 


[फा. सं. टी-4330/04/2024(34)] 


एस.आर.एच. फहमी, निदेशक (सीपीवी-) 


7007 GI/2024 (4789) 


4790 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(CPV Division) 
New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2035.—Statutory Order in pursuance of the clause (a) of the Section 2 of the Diplomatic and Consular 
Officers (Oaths and fees) Act, 948 (4l of 048), the Central Government hereby appoints Ms. Shruti Tiwari, 
Assistant Section Officer as Assistant Consular Officer in the Embassy of India, Bahrain, to perform the consular 
services as Assistant Consular Officer with effect from October 30, 2024. 


[F. No. T-4330/0/2024(34)] 
S.R.H FAHML Director (CPV-I) 


सूचना और प्रसारण मंत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 2036.--केंद्र सरकार, राजभाषा (संघ के शासकीय प्रयोजनों के लिए प्रयोग) नियम, 4976 के नियम 
40 के उप नियम (4) के अनुसरण में दूरदर्शन महानिदेशालय के अधीनस्थ कार्यालय यथा दूरदर्शन केंद्र, भुवनेश्वर जिनके 
80% से अधिक कर्मचारियों ने हिंदी का कार्यसाधक ज्ञान प्राप्त कर लिया है, को अधिसूचित करती है। 
[फा. सं. S-707/70/207-feat] 


प्रीति थापा, सहायक निदेशक (राजभाषा) 


MINISTRY OF INFORMATION AND BROADCASTING 
New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2036.—In pursuance of Sub-Rule (4) of Rule 0 of the Official Languages (Use for Official Purposes 
of the Union) Rules, [976, the Central Government hereby notifies the subordinate office of Directorate General, 
Doordarshan namely Doordarshan Kendra, Bhubaneswar whereof more than 80% of the staff have acquired the 
working knowledge of Hindi. 


[F. No. E-07/0/207-Hindi] 
PREETI THAPA, Assistant Director (O.L.) 


Waa, पोत परिवहन और जलमार्ग मंत्रालय 
(एसयू अनुभाग) 
नई दिल्‍ली, 24 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 2037.--भविष्य निधि अधिनियम, 7925 (925 का 79) की धारा 8 की उप-धारा (2) के अंतर्गत 


प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, केन्द्र सरकार, Udder निदेश देती है कि उपरोक्त अधिनियम (धारा 6क के अलावा) के 
प्रावधान भारतीय नौवहन निगम लिमिटेड के कर्मचारियों के हित के लिए स्थापित की गई भविष्य निधि पर लागू होंगे। 


व्याख्यात्मक ज्ञापन:- यह प्रमाणित किया जाता है कि पूर्व व्यापी प्रभाव से इस अधिसूचना के जारी होने से किसी 
भी व्यक्ति पर प्रतिकूल से प्रभाव नहीं होगा। 


[फा. सं. Wawa-7025/7/2022-7ay] 
के. एस. गीता, अवर सचिव 


[भाग AVE 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक i8, :946 479 


MINISTRY OF PORTS, SHIPPING AND WATERWAYS 
(Su Section) 


New Delhi, the 2]st October, 2024 


S.O. 2037.—In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of section 8 of the Provident Fund Act, 
925 ((9 of 925), the Central Government hereby directs that the provisions of the said Act (except section 6A) shall 
apply to the Provident Fund established for the benefit of the employees of the Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. 


Explanatory memorandum:-It is certified that no person shall be adversely affected by giving this 
notification with retrospective effect. 


[F. No. SS-025//2022-SU] 
K. S. GEETHA, Under Secy. 


श्रम एवं रोजगार मंत्रालय 
नई दिल्‍ली, 23 सितम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 2038.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्यायालय नंबर I, चंडीगढ़ के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 244/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29,/08,// 2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल -23042/38/2004-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 
मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT 


New Delhi, the 23rd September, 2024 


S.O. 2038.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 244/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024. 


[No. L-2302/38/2004 — IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
In the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-II, Chandigarh. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 
ID No. 244 /2005 
Registered on:- 05.08.2005 


Dharam Singh S/o Basakhi Ram C/o Shri Hem Prabh S/o Sh. Bali Ram, R/o Village Bhayarta, P.O. Chanahan, Teh. 
& Distt. Mandi (HP). 


teeeeeeeeeee Workman 
Versus 
l. Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector 9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 


..... Respondents/Managements 


4792 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 
Passed on:- 8.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/38/2004-IR(CM-II), Dated 07.07.2005, under clause (d) 
of sub-section (l) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has referred the 
following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


“Whether the demand of Shri Dharam Singh for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder 
Nagar is legal and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from which 
date? 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project{hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year [962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96l with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, 966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act”) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereinafter called as BCB). The workman was employed by BCB on 5..974. The workman 
who was employed in Beas Project (Unit-!) become the employee of Bhakra Beas Management Board(hereinafter 
called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso (l) of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of Re-organisation Act and the 
workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of B.B.M.B. from 5.05.976. The 
workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till his retrenchment. The employer 
made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year !977 and 978 and also in stages thereafter till 984. The 
workman was also retrenched by the employer on 23.09.[977 on account of reduction in strength due to part 
completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re-settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. 
Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in accordance with provision of 
The Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were appointed secretly by employer, 
violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, !947. The employer is also doing unfair labour practices as 
defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial 
Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling vacant posts, the employer declared 
some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


2. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition No.403/996, 
titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re-employment and in the 
said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted that retrenched workmen 
are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil suits for declaring them as 
a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, I*t Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. Mandi(HP), on 2.0.997 and 
later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the workmen to be filed before the 
competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after referring of the dispute of 
workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ petition before the Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same was dismissed on 07.05.2007 
and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.l6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by the 
management was also dismissed on 08.07.204. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may 
kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized and further be 
given all the consequential benefits. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(l) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 4977. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 
retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0I.0i.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79() of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 
Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that !093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to Ranjit Sagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 


Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., [/979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing them in 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4793 


BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. A replication was also filed by workman contravening the facts taken in written statement as reiterating the 
facts as stated in claim petition. 


5. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


6. The workman has examined himself as WWI and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. 


Th The management has filed affidavit of N.M. Jain, Sub-Divisional Officer, Sub- Division BBMB Sunder Nagar, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of workman. 


8. While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year [966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee 5..!974 and was retrenched on 23.09.977. All similar work charged employees including the 
present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 4984 therefore, the workmen cannot be 
termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. Moreover, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 
440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by the 
management and also by the award 2-C of the year 97] before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh 
between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the gazette on 
5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


9. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 23.09.977 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97] decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial pleas 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put l0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months 
thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or transferred 
from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first be made to the 
work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 0 years’ continuous service or more under the 
Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical fitness of such workmen. The 
scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to their prejudice nor their continuity 
of service affected.” 


0. Because the present workman had not completed !0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workman was retrenched on 
23.09.977 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 
25-H of the Act and his claim is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition on 20.07.2005. To 
support this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, 
AIR 2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 2078 decided _on 03. ॥2. 20/8 (५0५765पए76 R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal 
Pradesh High Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not 
prescribed time limit for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 974 
and was discharged on 23.09.977 and he has sought re-employment after 3] years which was held to be highly time 
barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 23.09.977 and 
thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer on 30.|.2005. 


ll. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
23.09.977 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 
view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 


4794 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section () of Section 0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition ।२०.३(00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. l6979/2007 dated 08.07.20I4. 


2. I have given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


3. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and _another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4. Inrespect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their conditions 
of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled to the benefit of any 
of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7965, they may make representations in that 
behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this Court to grant to the petitioners any of the 
reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the aforesaid rules, including the relief by way of a 
declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- permanent service under rule 3. We are further of the opinion 
that the petitioners have no right to be transferred to the services of the Bhakra Management Board, now re- 
named as the Bhakra Beas Management Board. Lastly, the proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not 
offend against the guarantee of equality contained in articles ॥4 and 76 of the Constitution, since the petitioners 
and the Deputationists belong to two different and distinct classes.” 


5. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“47, A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including the 
wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees who are 
borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the estimated cost of 
the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically come 
to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do not get 
any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or any benefits 
under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and are 
entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from 
that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and modification. 
The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant like the other 
petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of compensatory benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 of 978 shows that offers of alternative employment were made to 
the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last come, first go' 
has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact the work-charged 
employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 25707) of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, ''Lay-off and Retrenchment", have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing orders made under the 
Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, /946. 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4795 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, about 
26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the workmen 
and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), 
New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 7947, All the 72 unions of which the work- 
charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation proceedings. By reason of section 
483) (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the course of a conciliation proceeding is 
binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to which the dispute relates, whether they 
were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. Ltd. v. 
JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not even necessary, in order to bind the work 
men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show that they belonged to the union which took 
part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an extended 
operation to such settlements. In the instant case, all the 72 unions which represented the workmen on the 
work-charged establishment were parties to the conciliation proceedings. The settlement will therefore bind 
all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-C of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which the 
workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the aforesaid 
award dated May 75, 974, have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, involving a 
burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, /977 effected between 
them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and have 
accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 7974 they are not entitled to any rights apart from 
those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ४०.7246 of 7979 which is filed to challenge 
the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of over four and half 
years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


6. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


7. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which even contracts 
of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides that in the 
conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on Beas 
Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner(Central), 
New Delhi under Section !2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work charge employees who are 
working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that apart from the settlement 
in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference no.2-C in an industrial 
dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with which we are concerned 
and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. In the last para 47 itself 
specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May |5, [974 and they were 
entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


8. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held १5200/0(3) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 
and _ Development Authority Chandigarh _and Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 


produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 
application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section 2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


9. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


4796 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is 
workcharged. The institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime unavoidable. 
These workmen are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the execution of a 
specified work for which they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the services of such 
workman automatically come to an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged employee does not get 
any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees state Insurance Scheme. 
He does not indeed enjoy any retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in /947 it was not usual to have 
project, construction of which required a number of years to complete but after constituting ourselves into a 
democratic Republic and the Government having taken in hand five year plans for development of the 
country there are various schemes involving the construction of works for a period extending over several 
years as is the case of the instant Project. It commenced in 7962 and more than ॥2 years having passed the 
completion might take another few years. In such situation it seems reasonable and fair that a workman who 
has, like a regular employee, spent the part of his life ranging from 5-0 years upto 20 year, should not be 
thrown on the road and must be assured some benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of 
the matter is that the employer could not compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for 
which the latter had been engaged is completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the 
employer, be it the Government or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility 
of that workman for all time to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and 
content that instead of remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has in my 
opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive Principles 
enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which justice, social and 
economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the duty of an adjudicator of 
industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be guided by the fundamentals 
contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the economic capacity of the employer 
and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every citizen do in our present economy. It is not 
possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman employed by the respondent management are 
drawn from different states out of which I am informed about 6/70 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 
from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen 
are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from Kerala. The board hasby and large been consistently following 
the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness 
allowance. It is only with regard to categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by 
the erstwhile United State of Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations 
of its own standing committee.Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab 
policy.The state government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services 
of work charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for 7/0 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government.The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 
irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state the 
services of those who had put in 70 years or more would have been regularized the respondent management 
too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the services of at least of 
those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have created awkward situation as 
the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this respect.Moreover financial implications 
and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated abovel would have directed that the services of those of the workman 
who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the other problems 
arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost sight of The Central 
Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, Rajasthan Haryana and 
Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the question were discussed with the 
workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a formula evolved to which the workman 
virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is 
work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred to me is the matter of regularization of the services of 
work charge employees, but the directions that I am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser 
relief than claimed by the workmen. The management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace 
and is anxious to secure employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is 
accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months 
thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or 
transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first 
be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous 
service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical 


[भाग ए---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4797 


fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension that 
near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said that a 
suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore necessary to be 
employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further directed that 
category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the completion of the Project 
without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is made it will have no 
consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier trade provided the vacancy 
relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance 
staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also 
the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or 
work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need for 
workmen of those trades.” 


20. A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 
Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 
project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


2l. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of their 
service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are to 
be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the premises of 
the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those vacancies by 
registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, to the address 
given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall be 
sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in the list 
referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation on 
the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the employer, 
does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to him by the 
employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be filled on any 
subsequent occasion. ] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (/), the employer shall also inform the trade 
unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names of the 
retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where an 
intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


22. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 


4798 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 

reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 

Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work whether 

in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen of those 

trades” 

Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 

23. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 
24. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year 960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 
79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 
25. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jaswant 
Singh case (Supra). 
26. As regard this fact that workman has stated in his cross-examination that he was not been paid compensation 
under Section 25-F of the Act. It is not his case that there was breach of Section 25-F of the Act by the management 
and further management has specifically stated that he was paid all terminal benefits. There is no suggestion given to 
the ॥७४। N.M. Jain that workman was not paid retrenchment compensation etc. Hence, it is held that workman was 
paid retrenchment compensation. 
27. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97! and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 
28. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 

i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 

ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 


rvs 


ili. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 


case. 
The present work charged has stated that he was employed on 5..974 and was retrenched on 23.09.977. 
There is no denial of this fact by the management and nothing has come out in the cross-examination of 
workman that he has not worked for the aforesaid period. Thus, it is held that he worked from 5..974 to 
23.09.977 for about 2 years (less than 5 years) so he is entitled of Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per 
annum from the date of moving the application till its realization. 

29. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 

30. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section 47 of the Act for 

publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4799 


नई दिल्‍ली, 24 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2039.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा 47 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
बी. बी. एम. बी. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह - श्रम न्यायालय नंबर I, चंडीगढ़ के Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 497/2005) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/08/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल -2302/34/2004-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 24th September, 2024 


S.O. 2039.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 97/2005) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court NO 2, Chandigarh as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the 
Management of BBMB and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/08/2024. 


[No. L-2302/34/2004 — IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 
IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT-II, 
CHANDIGARH. 
Present: Mr. Kamal Kant, Presiding Officer. 
ID No. 97 /2005 
Registered on:-02.08.2005 


Sant Ram S/o Shri Bengali, C/o Shri Hem Prabh S/o Sh. Bali Ram, R/o Village Bhayarta, P.O. Chanahan, Teh. 
& Distt. Mandi (HP). 


seeeeeeeeeee Workman 
Versus 
l. Bhakra Beas management Board, Madhya Marg, Sector !9-B, Chandigarh through its Chairman. 
2. The Chief Engineer, BSL Project Sundernagar Township, Distt. Mandi, (HP). 
..... Respondents/Managements 
AWARD 
Passed on:- 5.07.2024 


Central Government vide Notification No.L-2302/34/2004-IR(CM-II), dated 07.07.2005, under 
clause (d) of sub-section (l) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947(hereinafter called the Act), has 
referred the following Industrial dispute for adjudication to this Tribunal:- 


““Whether the demand of Shri Sant Ram for reinstatement in the services of BBMB, Sunder 
Nagar is legal and justified? If so, to what relief the concerned workman is entitled and from 
which date? 


l. The brief facts, related to the case are that the construction of Beas Sutluj Link Project{hereinafter called as 
BSL(P)} started in the year [962 under Beas Control Board, which was constituted on 0.02.96] with its 
headquarter at Sundernagar and this project was under the control of Centre Government, who had been constructing, 
maintaining, operating and administrating it through various Boards in different phases. After passing of Pb. Re- 
Organisation Act, l966(hereinafter called “Re-Organisation Act’) Beas Control Board was replaced by Beas 
Construction Board (hereainfter called “BCB”). The workman was employed by BCB on 06.06.969. The workman 
who was employed in Beas Project(Unit-l!) become the employee of Bhakra Beas Management Board(hereinafter 
called as BBMB) in pursuance of proviso (l) of Section 80(3) and Section 80(5) of Re-organisation Act and the 
workman become the employee of the Centre Government under the management of B.B.M.B. from 5.05.976. The 
workman has completed 240 days in every calendar year and was not interrupted till his retrenchment. The employer 
made a bulk retrenchment of project employees in the year !977 and [978 and also in stages thereafter till 984. The 


4800 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


workman was also retrenched by the employer on 30.03.!984 on account of reduction in strength due to part 
completion of the BSL(P) and re-employment certificate was issued by the office of re-settlement B.S.L/B.B.M.B. 
Sundernagar for the re-employment of the retrenched workmen of B.S.L.(P)(BBMB) in accordance with provision of 
the Act. After the retrenchment of the workman, thousands of other persons were appointed secretly by employer, 
violating Section 25-G and Section 25-H of the I.D. Act, !947. The employer is also doing unfair labour practices as 
defined in Section 2(R)A of the ID Act. Management has also violated the provisions of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial 
Dispute(Central) Rule, !957(hereinafter called “The Industrial Rules”). By filling vacant posts, the employer declared 
some posts as surplus and retrenched the employees working on those posts. 


2. It is also maintained that the present workman and other workmen have filed a Civil Writ Petition No.403/996, 
titled as Sant Ram and 87 others Vs. BBMB in the Hon’ble High Court of Shimla for their re-employment and in the 
said writ petition management filed reply dated 6.04.996 by way of affidavit and admitted that retrenched workmen 
are employee of BBMB. The workmen have then withdrew the writ petition and filed civil suits for declaring them as 
a retrenched workmen of BBMB before the Sub-Judge, |*' Class, Sunder Nagar, Distt. Mandi(HP), on 2.0.997 and 
later on those suits were decided on 05.07.2002 and all plaints were returned to the workmen to be filed before the 
competent authority on the basis of which the present proceedings were initiated after referring of the dispute of 
workman from the Ministry of Labour on 07.07.2005. Thereafter, management filed writ petition before the Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court against the order of Ministry on 07.07.2005 and the same was dismissed on 07.05.2007 
and Special Leave Petition filed bearing nos.l6939-!7007 of 2007 in Hon’ble Supreme Court of India by the 
management was also dismissed on 08.07.20I4. It is therefore, prayed that the claim petition of the workman may 
kindly be allowed and workman be continued in the service of the management and be regularized and further be 
given all the consequential benefits. 


3. Management filed written statement, alleging therein that workman is Ex-work charged employee of Beas 
Construction Board, which was constituted under Section 80(l) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was 
retrenched after completion of the work of BCB in the year 977. The workman was paid terminal benefits i.e. 
retrenchment compensation, gratuity, ex-gratia amount on account of his retrenchment from BCB as per provisions of 
ID Act. It is further maintained that BCB and present management are two distinct and separate entities. It is also 
maintained that construction of Beas Project was undertaken by the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department prior to the 
re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 0I.0i.966. After re-organisation the work of BSL(P) was taken 
over by the Central Govt. on behalf of partner states of Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan. The Central Govt. constituted 
BCB under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act and further stipulated that any component of Beas Project in 
relation to which the construction has been completed be transferred by the Central Govt. to Bhakra Management 
Board(hereinafter called as BMB) constituted under Section 79() of the Re-organisation Act. It is further stated 
under Section 80(5) of the Re-organisation Act that BMB would be re-named as BBMB when any component of Beas 
Project was transferred under Section 80(6) of the Re-organisation Act. The workman was employed by the BCB. 
Thus, the workman never remained the employee of management. However, it is stated that !093 work-charged and 
2 contingent paid employees of Beas Project were sent on job order basis to Ranjit Sagar Dam, Punjab. They were 
taken over by the management under the benevolent policy of the Central Govt. as Central Govt. had given directions 
to BBMB to absorb these employees. The remaining work-charged employees were not entitled for the said benefit. 
Even work-charged employees of the BCB had filed a petition in the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, titled as 
Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 440, in which their claim for absorbing them in 
BBMB is not granted instead their retrenchment from BCB was upheld. Remaining averments have been denied and 
it is stated that the claim of the workman is hopelessly time barred and the workman has no legal enforceable right to 
claim employment in BBMB. It is prayed that claim be dismiss. 


4. Parties were given opportunity to lead evidence. 


5. The workman has examined himself as WWI and filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.WWI/A and has been 
cross-examined by the learned law officer of management. He also tendered his evidence alongwith documents i.e. 
Ex. WW-| Discharge Certificate and Ex. WW-2 re-settlement identity Card. 


6. The management has filed affidavit of N.M. Jain, Sub-Divisional Officer, Sub- Division BBMB Sunder Nagar, 
who filed his affidavit in evidence as Ex.MWI/A and has been cross-examined by the learned counsel of workman. 


7. While arguing the case, learned Law Officer for the management contended that initially Beas Control Board 
was constituted in the year !960. BCB was constituted in the year [966 and all the projects were transferred from 
Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB 
was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. 
Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be 
re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the 
BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project have been so transferred. All the projects under 
BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 984. Present workman was employed as work 
charged employee 06.06.!969 and was retrenched on 30.03.984. All similar work charged employees including the 
present workman was engaged by the BCB which ceased to exist in the year 4984 therefore, the workmen cannot be 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 480] 


termed as the employees of the BBMB because there does not exist BCB which was his parent department. Moreover, 
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled as Jaswant Singh and another Vs. Union of India & Anr., /979 SCC 
440 has held that work charged employees were bound by the settlement dated June 28, 977 effected by the 
management and also by the award 2-C of the year 497] before Sh. H.R. Sodhi, Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh 
between workman and employees of the Beas Construction Board, Sunder Nagar and published in the gazette on 
5.06.974 of the Govt. of India. 


8. So far as the claim of the workman regarding re-employment after retrenchment on 30.03.[984 is concerned, 
workman was not entitled for re-instatement as in a case under reference no.2-C of 97] decided by Sh. H.R. Sodhi, 
the then Presiding Officer, CGIT-Chandigarh, it was held that management in order to establish an industrial peace 
and to secure the work charge employees after completing the work can engage after completion of project at any 
time within 6 months for the maintenance of staff for project of any work if it is required to those work charged 
employees in order to seniority who have put I0 years of service. The relevant portion of para is reproduced as below: 


“It is accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six 
months thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or 
transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first 
be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous 
service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical 
fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected.“ 


9. Because the present workman had not completed !0 years of service so he is not entitled for re-employment. 
Learned representative for the management further contended that in this case workman was retrenched on 
30.03.984 after receiving due retrenchment compensation etc. and now he is claiming re-employment under Section 
25-H of the Act and his is hopelessly time barred as he has filed the present claim petition on 20.07.2005. To support 
this view he has placed reliance in the case titled as Chief Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam & Anr. Vs. Sham Lal, AIR 
2006, Supreme Court 2682, wherein in identical matters Court has not entertained writ petition due to inordinate 
delay. In the present case there is a delay of about 27 years. He also relied upon the case titled as Ram Chand Vs. The 
BBMB and another, CWP_no.2787 of 208, decided ०७७ 03. ॥2. 20/8 (५0५॥765प76 R-4) where the Hon’ble Himachal 
Pradesh High Court has held that dispute if any ought to be raised within a reasonable period as the ID Act does not 
prescribed time limit for referring such dispute. In the present case workman was engaged as Beldar in the year 969 
and was discharged on 30.03.984 and he has sought re-employment after 2 years which was held to be highly time 
barred. Thus, he contended that claim of workman is time barred. Workman was discharged on 30.03.[984 and 
thereafter he filed present claim before the Labour Conciliation Officer on 06.09.2005. 


0. While arguing the case, learned AR for the workman contended that in this case workman was discharged on 
29..978 due to reduction in strength and he was issued discharge certificate by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB 
Sundernagar. He referred to Section 25-H of the ID Act which provides re-employment of retrenched workman. He 
further has drawn the attention of the Court towards the statement of the workman. He was required to be adjust in 
view of under Section 25-G of the Act by the management Discharge Certificate was issued by the Management. He 
was not given any employment. While arguing further, learned AR for the workman referred to Rule 77 and 78 of the 
Industrial Dispute Central Rule 957(hereinafter called Industrial Rule). Rule 77 provides maintenance of seniority 
list of workman and it states that before any worker is retrenched the appellant-establishment is required to place on 
the notice board the seniority list of all the workmen who were to be retrenched but nothing has been done in this 
regard before retrenchment of the present worker. She also referred to Rule 78 which provides that as and when any 
vacancy incurred then retrenched workmen were required to be given registered notice but nothing was done by the 
management. Moreover, question of limitation does not arise as no limitation period has been prescribed under the 
Act for seeking relief under Clause (d) of Sub-Section () of Section !0 of the ID Act. Learned AR for the workman 
further contended that even reference made by the Government dated 07.07.2005 was challenged by the management 
in the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court vide Writ Petition ।०.३(00 of 2006 and their writ petition was 
dismissed by the Hon’ble High Court on 07.05.2007. Even SLP filed against the order dated 07.05.2007 was upheld 
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. l6979/2007 dated 08.07.204. 


ll. Ihave given due consideration to the arguments advanced by the learned AR for the workman and also for the 
management. 


2. The management relied upon mainly in this case on the case titled as Jaswant Singh and _another(supra), 
which is very material for decision of this case. The said judgment deals with two types of petitioners. First type of 
petitioners were employed by the BCB on purely temporary basis and they had also given written undertaking 
confirming the term of their appointment. The BCB appointed the first type of petitioners on ad hoc basis with a clear 
understanding that they will have no right to be retained in service after the completion of the Beas Project. They are 
Engineers, Section Officer, Accounts Clerk, Teacher etc. and they have claimed their parity with other employees 
who belonged to the services of the Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan Governments and who were serving on deputation 
in connection with the works of the BhakraNangal Scheme. 


4802 


3. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In respect of these employees, it was held as follow:- 


“To sum up, we are of the opinion that the petitioners are employees of the Central Government. Their 
conditions of service will be primarily governed by the terms of their appointment but, if they are entitled to 
the benefit of any of the rules of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Service) Rules 7965, they may make 
representations in that behalf to the appropriate authorities. It is, however, not possible for this Court to 
grant to the petitioners any of the reliefs claimed by them as arising out of the provisions of the aforesaid 
rules, including the relief by way of a declaration that they shall be deemed to be in quasi- permanent service 
under rule 3. We are further of the opinion that the petitioners have no right to be transferred to the services 
of the Bhakra Management Board, now re-named as the Bhakra Beas Management Board. Lastly, the 
proposed retrenchment of the petitioners does not offend against the guarantee of equality contained in 
articles ॥4 and 6 of the Constitution, since the petitioners and the Deputationists belong to two different and 
distinct classes.” 


4. As regards, second type of employees i.e. work charged employees the judgment deals in Para 4], 42, 
43, 44, 45, 46 and 47 which read as follow:- 


“47, A work-charged establishment broadly means an establishment of which the expenses, including the 
wages and allowances of the staff, are chargeable to "works". The pay and allowances of employees who 
are borne on a work-charged establishment are generally shown as a separate sub-head of the estimated 
cost of the work. 


42. The entire strength of labour employed for the purposes of the Beas Project was work-charged. The 
work-charged employees are engaged on a temporary basis and their appointments are made for the 
execution of a specified work. From the very nature of their employment, their services automatically come 
to an end on the completion of the works for the sole purpose of which they are employed. They do not get 
any relief under the Payment of Gratuity Act nor do they receive any retrenchment benefits or any benefits 
under the Employees State Insurance Schemes. 


43. But though the work-charged employees are denied these benefits, they are industrial workers and are 
entitled to the benefits of the pro- visions contained in the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from 
that special enactment under which even contracts of employment are open to adjustment9 and 
modification. The work-charged employees, therefore, are in a better position than temporary servant like 
the other petitioners who are liable to be thrown out of employment without any kind of compensatory 
benefits. 


44. The record of Writ Petition No. 4505 ०7978 shows that offers of alternative employment were made 
to the work- charged employees and many of them have accepted those offers. The rule of ‘last come, first 
go’ has also been consistently adopted while retrenching the work-charged employees. In fact the work- 
charged employees possess a unique right as industrial employees since, by reason of section 25707) of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, the provisions of Chapter VA, "'Lay-off and Retrenchment", have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law including standing orders 
made under the Industrial Employment (Standing orders) Act, 7946. 


45. There were in all about 36000 work-charged employees working on the Beas Project. Out of them, 
about 26000 have already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner 
(Central), New Delhi, under section 72 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 7947, All the 72 unions of which the 
work-charged employees are members were parties to the said conciliation proceedings. By reason of 
section 786(3)(6) of the Industrial Disputes Act, a settlement arrived at in the course of a conciliation 
proceeding is binding on all persons who were employed in the establishment to which the dispute relates, 
whether they were employed on the date of the dispute or subsequently. In Ramnagar Cane and Sugar Co. 
Ltd. v. JatinChakravorty and ors., it was held by this Court that it is not even necessary, in order to bind the 
work men to the settlement arrived at before the conciliator, to show that they belonged to the union which 
took part in the conciliation proceedings, since the policy underlying section 76 of the Act is to give an 
extended operation to such settlements. In the instant case, all the ॥2 unions which represented the 
workmen on the work-charged establishment were parties to the conciliation proceedings. The settlement 
will therefore bind all the work-charged employees. 


46. Apart from the settlement in the conciliation proceedings, an award was made by the Industrial 
Tribunal, Central, Chandigarh, in Reference No. 2-C of 7977, in an industrial dispute between the work- 
charged employees of the Beas-Sutlej Link Project, Sundernagar, with which we are concerned, and the 
management. Under that award, as stated in the award itself, a consent formula was evolved to which the 
workmen "virtually agreed". The benefits which flow- to the work- charged employees under the aforesaid 
award dated May 75, 79774 have been accepted by almost all the work- charged employees, involving a 
burden of about Rs. 3 crores on the employers. 


[भाग [eae 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4803 


47. Since the work-charged employees are bound by the settlement dated June 28, 7977 effected between 
them and the management in the conciliation proceedings and since they are also bound by and have 
accepted benefits under the consent award dated May 75, 7/774 they are not entitled to any rights apart from 
those flowing from the aforesaid settlement and the Award. SLP ७०.7246 of 7979 which is filed to 
challenge the Award and C.M.P. No.2077 of 7979 which is filed for condonation of the delay of over four 
and half years caused in filing the SLP shall have to be dismissed.” 


5. Thus, from the above observation of Supreme Court it is clear that work charged employees are engaged on a 
temporary basis and their appointments are made for the specified work and their service comes to an end on the 
completion of work for the sole purpose of which they are employed. 


6. Para 43 provides that work charged employees are industrial worker and entitled to the benefit of the provisions 
contained under the Industrial Disputes Act. Their rights flow from that special enactment under which even contracts 
of employment are open to adjustment and modification. Para 45 as reproduced above further provides that in the 
conciliation proceeding it has been held that there were about 36000 work charged employees working on Beas 
Project out of them 26000 has already accepted retrenchment compensation under the settlement arrived between the 
workmen and the management in the conciliation proceedings held by the Regional Labour Commissioner(Central), 
New Delhi under Section |2 of the ID Act. The said settlement is binding on all the work charge employees who are 
working in the establishment to which the dispute relates. In para 46 it is further stated that apart from the settlement 
in the conciliation proceeding an award was made by the CGIT Chandigarh in reference no.2-C in an industrial 
dispute between the work charged employee of the Beas Sutlej Project, Sundernagar with which we are concerned 
and the management. A consent formula was evolved to which the workmen virtually agreed. In the last para 47 itself 
specifically stated that work charged employees are bound by the settlement and award May |5, [974 and they were 
entitled to rights those flowing from the settlement and award. 


7. So far as the settlement executed between the work charged employees and management through unions, the 
same has not been produced by the management despite opportunity was given to file the same. Thus, adverse 
interference can be drawn against them. To support this view, reliance can be placed to the judgment of Hon’ble 
Punjab & Haryana High Court in case held १5200/0(3) RSJ 382 Ambika Parashad Versus Punjab Urban Planning 
and Development Authority Chandigarh _and_Another_wherein it has been held “that respondent has not 


produced record in the Labour Court to prove that Workman has not completed 240 days of service though 
application was submitted by the Workman for production of record held that a person in possession of the 
best evidence has to produce the same, otherwise adverse inference can be drawn against the said party”. In 
this case also as per order dated 0.05.2024 of this Tribunal. Respondent were asked to produce the settlement arrived 
between the 2 union of the work charged employee and management under Section 2 of ID Act before the Regional 
Labour Commissioner, New Delhi and all the work charged employee were bound by the said settlement. However, 
despite of availing 2-3 opportunities i.e. 20.05.2024, 20.06.2024 and 09.07.2024 the said policy was not produced and 
as such adverse inference can be drawn against the management in view of the above law. 


8. As regards award passed by Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh, the relevant claim of the work 
charged employees was regarding their regularization services and the finding given by the Tribunal is as follow:- 


“Regulation of Services of the workcharged employees. 


It is an un-disputed fact that the entire strength of labour as employed in the Project is workcharged. The 
institution of workcharged establishment is not only necessary but sometime unavoidable. These workmen 
are engaged on temporary basis and their services are utilized for the execution of a specified work for which 
they may be suited. From the very nature of employment the services of such workman automatically come to 
an end on the completion of the work. A workcharged employee does not get any relief under the Payment of 
Gratuity Act nor is he benefitted by the employees state Insurance Scheme. He does not indeed enjoy any 
retiral benefits. Before partition of the country in 7947 it was not usual to have project, construction of 
which required a number of years to complete but after constituting ourselves into a democratic Republic 
and the Government having taken in hand five year plans for development of the country there are various 
schemes involving the construction of works for a period extending over several years as is the case of the 
instant Project. It commenced in 7962 and more than ॥2 years having passed the completion might take 
another few years. In such situation it seems reasonable and fair that a workman who has, like a regular 
employee, spent the part of his life ranging from 5-I0 years upto 20 year, should not be thrown on the road 
and must be assured some benefits as are available to regular staff. The other aspect of the matter is that the 
employer could not compelled to retain workcharged employees after the work for which the latter had been 
engaged is completed, as after all, he was employed before a particular job and the employer, be it the 
Government or any of its public undertakings, cannot taken upon itself the responsibility of that workman 
for all time to come. It can be well argued that such a workmen should feel happy and content that instead of 
remaining un-employed be got employment for a long time. 


4804 


9. 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


To assure Industrial peace and economic justice to such class of workmen some balance has in my 
opinion to be stuck between the two extremes. It is the duty of the State under the Directive Principles 
enunciated in part 4 of the constitution to secure and protect that social order in which justice, social and 
economic could be had by all institutions of national life. I fell that it is equally the duty of an adjudicator of 
industrial disputes charged with the duty of administering social justice to be guided by the fundamentals 
contained in this chapter though he has to bear In mind the limits of the economic capacity of the employer 
and Endeavour must have ever be made to secure work for every citizen do in our present economy. It is not 
possible to immediately achieve that object. The workman employed by the respondent management are 
drawn from different states out of which I am informed about 6/70 thousands are from Punjab about 22000 
from Himachal Pradesh and the remaining from the states of Rajasthan and Haryana. Some of the workmen 
are from U.P and Bihar and a handful from Kerala. The board hasby and large been consistently following 
the Punjab pattern in the matter of wage structure, revision thereof from time to time and grant of dearness 
allowance. It is only with regard to categories not appearing in the common Schedule of Rates prepared by 
the erstwhile United State of Punjab that the board took its independence decisions on the recommendations 
of its own standing committee.Even Himachal Pradesh Government generally followed the Punjab 
policy.The state government of Punjab in its wisdom, and I should say rightly has declared that the services 
of work charged employees in building and roads branch who had worked for /0 years or more would stand 
regularized in the sense that the workmen would be treated at par with those in the regular service of the 
state government.The benefit of this announcement was afterwards extended to the employees of its 
irrigation branch as well at the workman who held from Punjab continue to stay in their parents state the 
services of those who had put in 70 years or more would have been regularized the respondent management 
too in pursuance of its policy to follow the Punjab pattern might have regularized the services of at least of 
those workmen who had come from Punjab but any such course would have created awkward situation as 
the workmen from other States could not be discriminated in this respect.Moreover financial implications 
and other complications are involved. 


In such circumstances stated abovel would have directed that the services of those of the workman 
who have been continuously employed for more than 70 years should be regularized. But the other problems 
arising from such a direction including financial impact on the employer cannot be lost sight of The Central 
Government through the board is only managing on behalf of the state of Punjab, Rajasthan Haryana and 
Himachal Pradesh who are partners in the venture.Several aspects of the question were discussed with the 
workmen and the management in the course of arguments and a formula evolved to which the workman 
virtually agreed and I feel that such a solution as stated hereunder is quite just to all the parties provided it is 
work out, honestly stated. No doubt,what is referred to me is the matter of regularization of the services of 
work charge employees, but the directions that I am issuing in my opinion, amount to only granting lesser 
relief than claimed by the workmen. The management can also have no grievance if it wants industrial peace 
and is anxious to secure employment to the work-charged employees after the completion of the work. It is 
accordingly, directed that at the time of completion of the Project or at any other time within six months 
thereof for the maintenance staff for the Project or any of its Works if it is required to be recruited or 
transferred from any department of the State Governments or of the Central Government, the offer shall first 
be made to the work-charged employees in order of their seniority who have put in 70 years’ continuous 
service or more under the Board in that category or trade where the vacancy occurs subject to the medical 
fitness of such workmen. The scale of wages as applicable to the workmen will not, however, be disturbed to 
their prejudice nor their continuity of service affected. The workmen have expressed an apprehension that 
near the completion of the Project trades of some of them might be changed so that it could be said that a 
suitable workman needed for a particular job was not available and an outsider was therefore necessary to be 
employed. To protect the workmen against this possible denial of their rights it is further directed that 
category or trade of no workman shall be changed within one year preceding the completion of the Project 
without his consent in writing and that if any such change without consent is made it will have no 
consequence inasmuch as such a workman will be entitled to the job of his earlier trade provided the vacancy 
relates to that trade. As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance 
staff. I have no reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also 
the Central Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or 
work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need for 
workmen of those trades.” 


A perusal of aforesaid findings made it ample clear that the order has been passed by the then learned Presiding 


Officer, CGIT, Chandigarh to maintain industrial peace and to secure employment to the work charged employees 
after the completion of the work and it was also held by the learned CGIT thatState Govt. who are beneficiary under 
the project and the Central Govt. will make every reasonable effort to get those workmen re-employed at any other 
project or work whether in any one of these States or in any other part of the country where there is a need of 
workmen of those trades. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4805 


20. Admittedly, in this case, no effort was made by the respondent to give any employment after the retrenchment 
of the workmen and even there is non-compliance of Rules 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules. The same are reproduced 
below: 


77. Maintenance of seniority list of workmen. -The employer shall prepare a list of all workmen in the 
particular category from which retrenchment is contemplated to be arranged according to the seniority of their 
service in that category and cause a copy thereof to be pasted on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the 
premises of the industrial establishment at least seven days before the actual date of retrenchment. 


78. Re-employment of retrenched workmen. - (7) At least ten days before the date on which vacancies are to 
be filled, the employer shall arrange for the display on a notice board in a conspicuous place in the premises of 
the industrial establishment details of those vacancies and shall also give intimation of those vacancies by 
registered post to every one of all the retrenched workmen eligible to be considered therefor, to the address 
given by him at the time of retrenchment or at any time thereafter: 


Provided that where the number of such vacancies is less than the number of retrenched workmen, it shall be 
sufficient if intimation is given by the employer individually to the senior-most retrenched workmen in the list 
referred to in rule 77 the number of such senior-most workmen being double the number of such vacancies: 


Provided further that where the vacancy is of a duration of less than one month there shall be no obligation on 
the employer to send intimation of such vacancy to individual retrenched workmen: 


Provided also that if a retrenched workman, without sufficient cause being shown in writing to the employer, 
does not offer himself for re-employment on the date or dates specified in the intimation sent to him by the 
employer under this sub-rule, the employer may not intimate to him the vacancies that may be filled on any 
subsequent occasion. ] 


(2) Immediately after complying with the provisions of sub-rule (7), the employer shall also inform the trade 
unions connected with the industrial establishment, of the number of vacancies to be filled and names of the 
retrenched workmen to whom intimation has been sent under that sub-rule: 


Provided that the provisions of this sub-rule need not be complied with by the employer in any case where an 
intimation is sent to every one of the workmen mentioned in the list prepared under rule 77. 


2l. However, the present work charged employee and other work-charged employees have been retrenched long 
back and even at the stage it is impossible to re-employe them. However, certainly in respect of workcharged 
employees present Respondent was directed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Judgment of Jaswant Singh (Supra) to 
give benefits in terms of settlement and award dated 5.05.974. The main purpose of Hon’ble Supreme Court and 
Ld. CGIT Chandigarh was to rehabilitate to some extent the work charged employees and restore peace and congenial 
atmosphere that is why Ld. CGIT Chandigarh had given directions to all state to re-employe them. Thus, it does not 
lie in the mouth of present Respondent that no relief can be granted against present Respondent as petitioners are not 
their employees. 


A. So far as this argument of Ld. AR of the management that those work charged employees only who have 
completed 0 years of service were required to be adjusted within 6 months from their retrenchment is concerned, the 
same is devoid of merit as no effort was made by the management to adjust the work charged employees. Moreover, 
no documentary evidence has been produced that any effort was made to adjust the workman after his retrenchment. 
Further, Ld. CGIT Chandigarh in its last lines concluded as under:- 


“As regards those of the workmen who cannot be absorbed on the regular maintenance staff. I have no 
reason to doubt that the State Government who are beneficiaries under the Project and also the Central 
Government will make every reasonable effort to get them re-employed at any other Project or work whether 
in any one of these states or in any other part of the country where there is a need of workmen of those 
trades” 


Nothing has come on record that above directions were complied with. 


22. Moreover, in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees and management, it 
cannot be interfered what were the terms and conditions in the said settlement. Further, CGIT Chandigarh has fixed 
ten years time and accrual of vacancy within six months keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and 
has evolved his own formula to bring peace and harmony between work charged employees and management but it 
cannot be said to be a universal policy in the absence of production of settlement between work charged employees 
and management. However, no effort was made to adjust the petitioners in view of order of CGIT. 


23. As regard, this contention of learned AR of management that petitioners were not the employees of the BBMB 
but were the employees of BCB, the same is devoid of merit as Discharge certificate was issued by the BBMB. 
Moreover, as per respondent Beas Control Board was constituted in the year 960. BCB was constituted in the year 
966 and all the projects were transferred from Beas Control Board to BCB in the year 966 thereafter as per Section 


4806 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


79 of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, BMB was constituted for administrative, maintenance and operation of various 
works as mentioned in Section 79 itself. Section 80(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act provides that BMB 
constituted under Section 79 of the Act shall be re-named as BBMB when any of the components of the Beas Project 
has been transferred under sub-section 5 and the BCB shall cease to exist when all the component of the Beas Project 
have been so transferred. All the projects under BCB were completed in the year 984 and BCB ceased to exist in 
984. When all work of BCB stands transferred to BBMB so it cannot be said that BBMB is separate identity than 
BCB. Rather BCB has merged in BBMB. Moreover, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jaswant Singh case(supra) in respect 
of work charged employees has no where stated that relief can be sought by work charged employees only against the 
BCB. So contention of Ld. AR of the management that BCB and BBMB are two separate entities is devoid of merit. 
24. So far this argument of Law Officer for the respondent that the case is hopelessly time barred is concerned, the 
same is again devoid of merits as there was non-compliance of Rule 77 and 78 of Industrial Rules which has been 
reproduced above. Moreover, there is no limitation period prescribed for filing a reference. Moreover, reference was 
received in the year 2005 and thereafter, several rounds of litigations have taken place. So far as case laws on the 
point of limitation the same are not attracted in the present case as there was no compliance of Judgment of Jawant 
Singh case (Supra). 

25. However, it is added that workman was allowed terminal benefits as admitted by him. Moreover, it is also not 
case of the petitioner that there is breach of Section 25 F of the Act. 

26. Further, there was non-compliance of Jaswant Singh Case (Supra), Reference No.2C of 97] and Rule 77 & 78 
of Industrial Rules and in this case it would be highly difficult to re-employe the workman. The only remedy left is to 
compensate the workman in term of money. 

27. Keeping in view the fact and circumstances of the present case and other connected case of similar nature the 
following scheme of compensation is deemed fit by this Tribunal: 

i. Work charged employee who has completed 5 years of service shall be entitled for Rs.50,000/- along with 
interest @9% per annum as compensation from the date of moving of application till the realization of 
amount. 

ii. Work charged employee who has completed less than 5 years but more than | year would be entitled 
Rs.25,000/- along with interest @9% per annum from the date of moving of application till the realization 
of amount. 

iii. Those employees who have not completed | year will not be entitled for any compensation in the present 
case. 

The present work charged workman was employed on 06.06.969 and was retrenched on 30.03.984 as 
mentioned in Discharge Certificate (Ex.W-) issued by Sub Divisional Officer, BBMB Sundernagar, and has 
worked for l4 years and about 9 months (more than 5 years) so he is entitled of Rs.50,000/- along with interest 
@9% per annum from the date of moving the application till its realization. 

28. The reference is answered accordingly and stands disposed off. 


29. Let copy of this award be sent to the Appropriate Government as required under Section |7 of the Act for 
publication. 


KAMAL KANT, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 2040.-.औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस.सी.सी.एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान संख्या 22/2049) को 
प्रकाशित करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 40/40/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 
[सं. एल -22043/04/2024-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the l4th October, 2024 


S.O. 2040.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 ((4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 22/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
S.C.C.Ltd. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 0/0/2024. 


[No. L-2203/0I/2024 — IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4807 


ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 27" day of September, 2024 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 22/209 
Between: 
Sri G.K. Sampath Kumar, 
S/o Late G. Sanjeeva Rao, 
R/o DA.I8, Opp. To Head Office, 


Kothagudem, Khammam District. 4 ....Petitioner 
AND 

l. The Chairman & Managing Director, 

M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 

Kothagudem. 
ox The Director (PA & W), 

M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 

Kothagudem. 
3. The General Manager, 

M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 

Bellampally, Adilabad Dist.. 25 -Respondent s 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Party in Person 
For the Respondent : Sri Y. Ranjeeth Reddy, Advocate 

AWARD 


Sri G.K. Sampath Kumar who worked as Sr. Asst. Superintendent (who will be referred to as the workman) 
has filed this petition under Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, [947 against the Respondent s M/s. Singareni 
Collieries Company Ltd., seeking for declaring the proceeding dated 25.2.208 issued by Respondent as illegal, 
arbitrary and to set aside the same consequently directing the Respondent s to reinstate the Petitioner into service duly 
granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc., 
and such other reliefs as this court may deems fit. 


2. The averments made in the petition in brief are as follows: 


It is to submit that, the Respondent conducted enquiry proceedings on vide Ref.No.BPA/PER/264] 
dated 0.03.20I5 by issuing a charge sheet cum suspension order alleging that the Petitioner was transferred to 
Bellampalli Area and he has not joined in the above said area as per the directions of the Respondent company and 
the 2" Charge leveled against him is that he is having huge amounts in his bank accounts and it comes under 
violation of the standing orders of the l“' Respondent Company. It is submitted that, he has submitted his detailed 
explanation and enquiry proceedings are concluded and during enquiry proceedings the Respondent produced the 
statements of alleged effected transfer employees and Petitioner has insisted the Presenting Officer for furnishing the 
details of transfer applications of the employees, approved note copies and also transfer orders. Enquiry was 
commenced on |.0!.20!6 and the Respondent assured to furnish the details pertaining to transfer orders along with 
approved note copies. It is submitted that, he challenged the action of the Respondent s in suspending him without 
issuance of notice when he was sick and no transfer orders were served on him. Petitioner filed a Writ Petition by 
challenging the action of the Respondent s against issuance of Charge sheet cum suspension order and the Hon'ble 
High Court was pleased to observe in WP.No.7463 of 205 that at the time of suspension he was under sick with the 
knowledge of the Respondent Company and further observed that his sickness continued and the said Writ Petition 
was pending before the Hon'ble Court. It is submitted that on 22.02.206 he has applied for the information from the 


4808 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


34 Respondent pertaining to the transfer applications, approved note copies and transfer orders of the employees as 
alleged by the Presenting Officer against him and the said information was not given by the authorities and then 
Petitioner filed an appeal on 23.03.206, but in vain. On 2.04.206 he applied to the Andhra Pradesh Information 
Commission against the Respondent No. | to 3 and the same was numbered as Appeal No. 9686/SIC-DR.IA/20 6 
and on enquiry the Hon'ble Commission directed the Respondent Nos.! to 3 to furnish information by an order dated 
0.09.206. It is submitted that, the Respondent Company initiated enquiry proceedings against him with a 
complaint lodged with the Anti Corruption Bureau on 30.08.20I5 by requesting them to enquire him on the issues of 
transfer and posting of the staff and medical invalidation of the employees from the period of 2009 to 20l4 and 
accordingly the ACB sought information from the 3 Respondent. It is submitted that, in those circumstances he 
approached the Hon’ble High Court by way of filing a Writ Petition No.39324 of 206 by challenging the Respondent 
78 inaction in not submitting the transfer applications during the enquiry proceedings and the Respondent s filed their 
counter and the Writ Petition was disposed by the Hon’ble Court on 27.02.20!7 by directing the Respondents to 
permit him to see and note down the alleged transfers applications during the enquiry proceedings and after that the 
Respondents permitted him to note down the contents of the documents. It is submitted that, on 04.0.208 he asked 
the presenting officer with regarding the second charge of huge amounts lying in his bank accounts and asked them to 
provide him preliminary enquiry report in connection with the second charge and the presenting officer categorically 
stated that no preliminary enquiry report has been provided to them by the concerned department against his request. 
Earlier also he applied to the General Manager, Bellampalli to furnish the particulars of the second charge. It is 
submitted that, General Manager issued a letter to the 3 Respondent dated !.03.20I5 requesting him to produce 
the relevant documents pertaining to second charge and he also applied to the public information officer under RTI 
Act and the Public Information Officer under RTI Act gave certain information that a preliminary enquiry was 
conducted on his second charge i.e.., on 23.02.20I2 and on 2i..20!7 the Public Information Officer denied to 
submit that report which is stated that exempted from disclosure under 8 (l) (g) of RTI Act, 2005. It is submitted 
that, with regard to the second charge the Respondents intention is to fix him by stating that he is having huge 
amounts in his bank account from the years 2004 to 20 by way of taking money in the name of transfer of 
employees from one place to another and the Respondents are not providing the alleged transfers filed and 
Respondents are not submitting the preliminary enquiry report dated 23.02.20i2 and during the enquiry proceedings 
also the presenting officer categorically admitted that the preliminary enquiry report was not produced by the 
Respondents. It is submitted that without any valid ground Respondents have framed the second charge against 
Petitioner. It is submitted that, the Respondents No. | to 3 ought to have given the information pertaining to the 
charges framed against him but the Respondents without furnishing information to him and to proceed against him 
with an evil motive and also initiated criminal proceedings by way of filing complaints to the ACB on 30.05.205. It 
is submitted that Petitioner has challenged the enquiry proceedings of the Respondents before this Hon'ble Court vide 
W.P. No. 535 of 208 and Hon'ble court was pleased to observe, permitted to withdraw the writ petition filed by him 
with liberty to assail any adverse order that may be passed against him to challenge the same before the Hon'ble High 
Court. It is submitted that the office of the 3! Respondent issued a letter No.BPA/PER/EO/309 dt.2.2.208 a 
274 show cause notice along with enquiry report and stated that the allegations against him in the enquiry report by 
the Presenting Officer are proved as per the charge sheet No.BPA/PER/2/64! dt.l0-03-20I5 under Respondents 
company standing order No.25 (3), 25 (23), 25 (3l) & 25 (l) for willful insubordination, absence from duty, 
deliberate Act which is subversive of discipline and theft, fraud or dishonesty. It is submitted that, from the enquiry 
report it is clear that the Respondents have influenced the enquiry officer though there is ample evidence to disprove 
the charges leveled against him more particularly with regard to charge No.l. The enquiry report itself clearly say 
that the transfer order was served him on 2.7.205 and prior to that Petitioner was sick which was admitted by the 
Presenting Officer in the enquiry. It was declared as charge No.] was proved and the same is illegal and against to the 
principles of natural justice. It is submitted that, the Presenting Officer without furnishing the preliminary report of 
charges against him initiated and concluded the enquiry proceeding. It is submitted that, as per the enquiry report the 
Respondents and the enquiry officer exceeding their limits though it is not under the preview of the standing orders of 
theft fraud, dishonesty and as per the Respondent company standing orders, in Petitioner’s case he has not made 
theft of any amounts nor fraud of any amounts of the Company at any point of time with the business of Respondent 
company or its property and the entire enquiry proceeding is void ab intio. It is submitted that, Petitioner has filed 
Writ Petition No.45474 of 20I8 by challenging the action of the Respondent by initiating disciplinary proceedings 
with a vindictive mode and Hon'ble Court opined that his Writ Petition is premature stage and permitted to withdraw 
his writ petition. It is submitted that, on 25.2.20I8 27 Respondent passed an order of dismissal, in view of 
standing order No.25 (l) and 25 (३]) of Respondent Company and dismissed the Petitioner from the rolls of the 
Respondent Company. The Respondent Company immediately without waiting for the remedies leftover to him as 
per the Standing Order, more particularly right of Appeal and Right of Review are not exhausted, initiated eviction 
proceedings against him for the quarter allotted to him at Kothagudem. It is submitted that under Telangana Public 
Premises Eviction Act, Petitioner filed ४७४०.४०.।।7० of 20I9 and orders passed directing the Respondent authorities 
not to proceed till the exhaust of Appeal provisions as per the Standing Orders of the Respondent Company. Further 
the Respondent Company initiated Criminal Proceedings through ACB by way of registering the crime and sought 
information and the investigation is pending before the ACB on the same line of enquiry. It is further submitted that, 
accordingly on 04.02.209 he filed an appeal to  [२०४5७णाव्शा। against the orders of the 274 Respondent . Thereafter 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4809 


the Respondent Company foisted false Criminal Complaint before the ACB authorities though another case is 
pending before the authorities and after dismissal of services of the Respondent Company on 3!.!2.208 registered a 
crime No.] of 20l9 and arrested him on 06.02.20l9 and thereafter he obtained bail from the Hon'ble ACB Court, 
Hyderabad. It is submitted that Respondent Company on 2.03.20l9 dismissed his appeal by confirming the orders 
of the 2™ Respondent. It is submitted that the action of the Respondent No.l and 2 in awarding punishment of 
dismissal from the Respondent Company is illegal and violation of the Principles of equity and the dismissal order 
passed by the Respondent s is discrimination against him. It is submitted that, the Petitioner is a workman and not in 
Executive cadre and the wages are given to the Petitioner as per the National Coal Wages Agreement. Accordingly 
this Tribunal having jurisdiction to entertain the dispute of dismissal between the Petitioner and Respondents. _ It is 
prayed to declare the impugned office Proceedings No.CMD/PS/IR/APP/Ill6 dated 2.03.20I9 and 
BPA/PER/29/3502 dated 25.2.208 issued by the Respondent No.! and 2 as illegal and consequently direct the 
Respondent s to re-instate the Petitioner into service duly granting all other consequential benefits, such as continuity 
of service, back wages and all other attendant benefits etc.. 


3. The Respondent s filed counter denying the averments made in the petition, with the averments in brief 
which runs as follows: 


It is submitted that the present petition has been filed by the Petitioner Sri G.K. Sampath Kumar. It is submitted that 
he was transferred to Bellampalli Area from Kothagudem Area on administrative grounds vide Office Order No. 
CRP/PER.IRPM/3208/329 dated 30.0!.20I5 with an advise to report to General Manager, Bellampally Area on 
02.02.205 but Petitioner did not report and remained absent for duties without sanctioned leave. It was reported that 
Petitioner had huge amounts lying in his bank accounts which are disproportionate to his known source of income. 
Therefore the Petitioner was charged for misconduct under Company standing orders No. 25(3), 25(23), 25(3) and 
25(L) and the Petitioner was issued charge sheet vide BPA/PER /2/64], dated 0.03.20I5 suspending him for duties 
with effect from l0.03.205 with pending enquiry. The relevant extract of the charges leveled are as follows: 


Ol. You were transferred on administrative grounds to work at Bellampalli Area vide GM(P)/IR&PM Office 
OrderNo.CRP/PER/ TRPM/ 3208/ 329, dt.30.0.205 with an advise to report to the undersigned for work and 
placement with immediate effect. Accordingly, you were relieved vide DGM(E&M)Area Stores, Kothagudem 
Area Lr.No.KGM/AST/38/204 5/260, dt.3.0.20I5 with immediate effect i.e., from 3.0.20I5 after 
office hours. 


As per the above orders, you were required to report to the office of the undersigned on 02.02.20I5 after 
availing play day on 0I.02.20!5. However, it is found that so far you have not reported at the office of the 
undersigned for duty in compliance with the above cited administrative office orders and remained absent 
without sanctioned leave. 


02. Further, it is reported that prima facie you have huge amounts lying in your Bank accounts which are 
disproportionate to your known source of income. The above acts of yours amount to misconduct under 
company's Standing Orders. 


The extract of acts of misconduct as per standing orders of Respondent Company as follows: 
25(/ ): Theft, fraud or dishonest in connection with the employer's business or property 


25(3): Willful insubordination or disobedience, whether alone or in conjunction with another or others of any lawful 
or reasonable order of a superior 


25(23): Any willful and deliberate act which is subversive of discipline or which may be detrimental to the interest of 
the company. 


25(3): Absence from duty without sanctioned leave or sufficient cause or overstaying beyond sanctioned leave. 


It is submitted that the Petitioner was given full & fair opportunity to defend himself during the enquiry on the 
charges levelled against him. The Disciplinary proceedings were conducted duly following the principles of natural 
justice with all documentary evidence relevant to the charges framed against him. It is submitted that all the 
documents that are relevant to the domestic enquiry on the subject referred were handed over to the Petitioner. It is 
submitted that the Petitioner was made unfit for duty on 3I/l/20I5 for the compliant of loose motions. He was 
referred to main hospital for non relief of complaint on [7/2/205. But on examination by special doctor he was found 
fit for duty on 7/2/20I5 and the same was communicated to the Petitioner. Petitioner was on sick rolls up to 
7.02.205 as he was suffered from loose motions and lower back ache. It is submitted that Petitioner was referred 
to Respondent Company Main Hospital, Kothagudem where he was examined by specialist doctors who found him 
fit for duty. It is submitted that he had again submitted another application for extension of sick leave from 
2.02.205 onwards, which was not granted as he was declared fit for duty and as Petitioner was not attending duties 
from 7.02.20I5 onwards with out any sanctioned leave and permission, he was served with Charge Sheet cum 
Suspension pending enquiry on 0.03.20I5. It is submitted that questioning the suspension order Petitioner filed WP 
No. 7463 of 20I5 praying the Hon'ble High court to issue an order, writ or direction more particularly in the nature of 


480 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


writ of mandamus declaring the charge sheet cum suspension order issued by the Respondent company vide 
Proc.Ref.No. BPA/PER/2/64 dated 0.03.20I5 by suspending the Petitioner from the service with immediate effect 
from 0.03.20i5 pending enquiry as illegal, arbitrary and violative of Article l4,9()(g) and 2] of the constitution of 
India by declaring the same as unconstitutional and violative of principles of natural justice and fundamental rights 
guaranteed under the constitution of India. It is submitted that the Respondents filed counter denying the allegations 
made by the Petitioner in Writ Petition No.7463 of 20I5 and same is still pending before Hon'ble High Court. It is 
submitted that during the course of enquiry into charge sheet on 04.07.206, the Petitioner requested Presenting 
officer to provide transfer applications and approved note coppices and recommendation letters made by Petitioner in 
respect of Witnesses/employees which were confidential, hence his request was rejected due to administrative 
reasons. It is submitted that, it is true that the Respondent Company lodged a complaint with ACB against the 
Petitioner for his corrupted actions during the period from 2009 to 20I4. It is further submitted that, it is true, the 
Respondent Company has filed WP 36546 of 20I6 against the orders of Hon'ble Andhra Pradesh Information 
Commission and the Hon'ble High Court was pleased to suspend the orders of Hon'ble Andhra Pradesh Information 
Commission and same is pending before Hon'ble High Court. It is submitted that during the course of enquiry into 
charge sheet on 04.07.206, the Petitioner was permitted to cross examine the Presenting Officer and the Petitioner 
requested Presenting officer to provide transfer applications and approved note copies and recommendation letters 
made by Petitioner in respect of Witness’s/employees. As those documents are confidential, hence his request was 
rejected due to administrative reasons. It is submitted that the Petitioner approached Hon'ble High Court for the State 
of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh and filed Writ Petition No. 39324 of 20l6 questioning the action of Respondent 
Company in not furnishing the copies of Transfer applications of Employees/ Witnesses as sought by him during the 
enquiry proceedings and disposed of with the following direction: 


" Enquiry officer shall permit the Petitioner to peruse those documents and allow him to make notes of the contents of 
documents. However, Petitioner that not indulges in tampering of the documents of taking photographs of the 
documents and only notes of the contents of the documents to enable him to make submissions to support his defense. 
After the documents are perused, the Enquiry officer may proceed further in the enquiry." 


It is submitted that accordingly, the Petitioner was provided with the documents. It is submitted that Respondent 
Company has lodged a criminal complaint with ACB, against the Petitioner for his corrupted actions. It is further 
submitted that the Petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 535 of 20i8 against the Respondent Company for not furnishing 
the information pertaining to Second Charge framed against Petitioner in Charge sheet No. BPA/PER/2/64I, dated 
0.03.205. It is submitted that Petitioner himself sought permission from Hon'ble High Court to with draw the 
Writ Petition and the High Court was pleased to dismiss the Writ Petition as withdrawn by granting liberty to the 
Petitioner by its order dated: 22/0/208. It is submitted that the Disciplinary Proceedings were conducted on 
23.04.20i5 and on subsequent dates as noted in the enquiry report. It is submitted that the Petitioner was present and 
the enquiry was conducted by duly following the principles of natural justice. The Petitioner was explained the 
charges leveled against in the language understood by him. The competent authority decided to place under 
suspension with effect from 0.03.20l5 pending enquiry as the acts of misconduct by the Petitioner are grave and 
serious nature, he was placed under suspension with effect from 0.03.20I5 pending enquiry and being paid 
subsistence allowance as per rules in vogue. The Petitioner acknowledged the receipt of the charge sheet and 
submitted his explanation, which was considered to be not satisfactory. | Though opportunity was given by the 
Enquiry Officer during enquiry proceeding, the charge sheeted employee has not chosen to avail any defense assistant 
during the course of enquiry. The enquiry was conducted by giving full and fair opportunity to Petitioner/ charge 
sheeted employee. The Petitioner cross examined the Presenting Officer on the charges levied against him. The 
Enquiry Officer submitted the enquiry report holding the Petitioner partially guilty of misconduct under 25(l) and 
guilty of 25(3 ) of the Company's Standing Orders. After thorough enquiry into the charges levelled against the 
Petitioner and on perusal of the evidence furnished by him, the competent authority concluded that the presenting 
Officer has established/proved the charges leveled against charge sheeted employee beyond reasonable doubt. A 
copy of the Enquiry Proceedings and Enquiry Report submitted by the Enquiry Officer was sent to the Petitioner vide 
Ref. No. BPA/PER/EO/309 dated 5..208 giving him a fair opportunity to represent against the same. The 
Petitioner submitted his explanation dated 26..208, the contentions raised by the charge sheeted employee in his 
representation were examined and all relevant reports, holding the Petitioner guilty of misconduct leveled against 
him under Company Standing Order No 25(]) is partially proved and 25(3]) is proved, the competent authority held 
that "as there are no merits in the representation of Sri GK Sampath Kumar the findings of the Enquiry Officer 
holding Sri GK Sampath Kumar guiltily of the charges under Company Standing Orders 25(l) and 25(3]) are hereby 
confirmed". Therefore in exercise of the powers conferred under Company Standing Order No. 26(H), the competent 
authority decided to impose a penalty of "Dismissal from the services of the Company". The Petitioner was 
communicated about the penalty of dismissal from services imposed on him vide Ref.No. BPA/PER/29/3502 dated 
25.2.20i8 and informed that if he desires to prefer an Appeal within 45 days he can apply. It is submitted that 
Petitioner preferred an appeal against the order of dismissal from services imposed on him by the competent authority 
and the appellate authority after going through the past record of the Petitioner found that there are no extenuating 
circumstances to set aside the penalty of dismissal from the company services as such confirmed the penalty of 
dismissal imposed by the competent authority. It is submitted that the Petitioner filed Writ Petition No. 535 of 208 


[भाग ए---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 48 


against Respondent Company for not furnishing the information pertaining to Second Charge framed against 
Petitioner in Charge sheet No. BPA/PER/2/64, dated 0.03.20I5 and the High Court was pleased to dismiss the 
Writ Petition as withdrawn by granting liberty to the Petitioner by its order. It is submitted that, it is true that, as per 
enquiry procedure, on completion of enquiry proceedings. From the above it is evident that the Petitioner is a 
litigant person and is habituated to file frivolous petitions against the Respondent company and further he himself is 
withdrawing the same for the reasons best known to him. It is submitted that the General Manager (Personnel), 
Welfare & CSR served a letter to Petitioner vide No. CRP/PER/WEL/503, dated: 20.2.208 stating that in spite of 
lapse of 3 years [0 months from the date of transfer, the Petitioner failed to surrender/vacate the Quarter No. DA-I8 
allotted at Kothagudem to Company and directed Petitioner to vacate the said Quarter on or before 28.2.208 failing 
which, the eviction proceedings will be initiated against Petitioner as per the Telangana Public Premises(Eviction and 
Unauthorized Occupations) Act, 968. It is further submitted that, the Petitioner was dismissed from company service 
Respondent Company Service with effect from 26. !2.208. Form-A notice under Section 4 of the Telangana Public 
Premises (Eviction and Unauthorized Occupations) Act, !968 has been served to the Petitioner on 09.0!.209 to show 
cause (Eviction and Unauthorized Occupations) Act, 968 as to why he should not be evicted from Respondent 
Company Quarter No. DA I8, Kothagudem. In response to the letter dated:26. 2.208, the Petitioner submitted 
reply. It is further submitted that the Appellate Authority examined Petitioner Appeal dated 26.!.208, and 
confirmed dismissal of the Petitioner vide proceeding of C&MD of the Respondent Company, CMDPS/IR/APP/l6 
Dated 2.03.20I9. After disposal of Appeal before Appellate Authority, the Eviction Order dated 30.03.20i9 was 
served to the Petitioner and the Petitioner vacated the Quarter No. DA-I8 at Kothagudem on 05.04.20I9. — Further 
the Respondent Company lodged a complaint against Petitioner with ACB. It is submitted that the allegations 
made by the Petitioner are not true and correct, because different Disciplinary Authorities and Appellate Authorities 
are laid down for different grades of employees for their misconduct. The Disciplinary Authority in the instant case 
is Director (PA&W), as the Petitioner is in A-Grade, the Disciplinary Authority for Grade-A employees is Director 
(PA&W) and Appellate Authority is C&MD of Respondent Company. There is no discrimination or violation of 
principles and natural justice, in conducting enquiry, decision of Disciplinary Authority or Appellate Authority. It is 
submitted that the Respondent Company imposed dismissal from service as per clause No.26 of Respondent 
Company Standing orders. _It is submitted that the inquiry was conducted on four charges leveled against the 
Petitioner on different dates and venues by following all the procedures laid down, wherein Petitioner given full and 
fair opportunity to the Petitioner to defend himself and on proved charges the punishment of dismissal was imposed 
on the Petitioner after completion of enquiry. It is therefore prayed to dismiss the petition filed by the Petitioner. 


4. On the basis of rival pleadings the following points emerge for determination: - 
I. Whether the departmental enquiry held against the Petitioner is legal and valid? 


Il. Whether the action of the Respondent management in terminating the services of the Petitioner 
vide office proceeding dated 2.3.209 and proceedings dated 25.2.208 is justified? 


Ill. To what relief, if any, the Petitioner is entitled for? 


Both parties have filed written submissions. 


Findings:- 
5. _ Point No.I:- The departmental enquiry held against the Petitioner has been held legal and valid vide order dated 
9.8.2023. 


This point is answered accordingly. 


6. Point No.II:-Petitioner in the present case has challenged the impugned order proceedings dated 2.3.209 and 
dismissal order dated 25.2.208 issued by the Respondent No.! and Respondent No.2, respectively, on the grounds 
mentioned in his petition, first and foremost plea of the Petitioner is that the Respondent has conducted the 
preliminary enquiry regarding second charge before Departmental Enquiry the report of preliminary enquiry was not 
provided to him despite his request and on this ground the dismissal order is illegal. 


7. Admittedly Petitioner was dismissed from service vide office order dated 25.2.20l8 of Respondent for 
misconduct under Standing Order No.25.] and 25.3] of the Respondent company. The main object of conducting 
preliminary enquiry against the employee is to ascertain the availability of substantial evidence which will sustain a 
departmental enquiry or disciplinary proceedings or registration of regular case as the case may be. Before initiation 
of the departmental enquiry the Disciplinary Authority embarked upon to ascertain the availability of substantial 
evidence against the delinquent in the matter and on the basis of report of preliminary inquiry, the Disciplinary 
Authority proceeds to form opinion so as to whether disciplinary proceedings, against the delinquent employee 
should be initiated or not. Thus, the preliminary enquiry report is meant for the satisfaction of the Disciplinary 
Authority. The report of preliminary enquiry is not to be furnished to the delinquent employee until it is used in 
Disciplinary Proceeding as evidence. Thus, in the present matter, Disciplinary Authority on the basis of report of 
preliminary enquiry has formed the opinion that the charge sheet to be served on delinquent employee and the same 
has been served. The record of enquiry proceeding also goes to reveal that CSE was provided reasonable sufficient 


482 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


fair hearing opportunity during the enquiry proceeding. Moreover, Departmental Enquiry has already been held 
legal and valid in the present matter. Therefore, said plea of the Petitioner is not tenable. 


8. Further, the record of enquiry proceedings, enquiry report as well as order dated 25.2.208 of the Disciplinary 
Authority, Director (PA&W) of Singareni Collieries, Kothagudem, goes to show that the Petitioner has been found 
guilty of the charge under Company’s Standing Orders No.25.l and 25.3l. and consequently on the basis of Enquiry 
Report Respondent Disciplinary Authority has passed dismissal order of Petitioner from service vide order dated 
25.2.208. 


The Company Standing Order No.25.l describe misconduct as below:- 

“Theft, fraud or dishonest in connection with the employer’s business or property.” 

Standing Order 25.3] reads as follows:- 

“Absence from duty without sanction or sufficient cause or overstaying beyond sanctioned leave.” 


As regards charge under Standing Order No.25.3l, Petitioner submitted that it can be seen from the enquiry report 
that the Respondents has influenced the Enquiry Officer and there is ample evidence to disprove the charges levelled 
against Petitioner, more particularly with regard to charge No., further it is submitted that the enquiry report itself 
clearly says that transfer order was served him on 2.7.205 and prior to that he was under sick and same was 
admitted by the Presenting Officer and the Enquiry officer as it was declared as charge No.| is proved and the same is 
against the principles of natural justice and other judgments rendered by this Hon’ble Court and other courts. 


9. Per Contra, Respondent contended that Petitioner was made unfit for duty on 3.!.20I5 on the complaint of 
loose motions. He was referred to Main Hospital on of complaint of illness on !7.2.20I5, but on examination by 
specialist Doctor, he was found fit for duty on 7.2.205 and same was communicated to the Petitioner. Further, it is 
submitted that Petitioner was on sick rolls upto 7.2.20I5 as he suffered from loose motions and low back ache. 
Respondent submitted that Petitioner was referred to the Respondent Company’s Main Hospital, Kothagudem, 
where he was examined by specialist Doctors who found him fit for duty. Further, it is submitted that he had again 
submitted another application for extension of sick leave from 2.2.20l5 onwards, which was not granted as he was 
declared fit for duty. Respondent submits that Petitioner was not attending duties from 7.2.20l5 without any 
sanctioned leave and permission, therefore, he was served with chargesheet cum suspension order pending enquiry 
on 0.3.20I5. Further, it is submitted that questioning the suspension order Petitioner filed Writ Petition No.7463 
of 20l5 praying the Hon’ble High Court to issue an order/direction more particularly in the nature of writ of 
mandamus declaring the chargesheet cum suspension order issued by the Respondent company vide proceeding No. 
BPA/ PER/I2/64 dated 0.3.20I5 by suspending the Petitioner from the service with immediate effect from 
0.3.20I5 pending enquiry as illegal and arbitrary. Further, it is submitted that Respondent has filed the counter 
denying the allegations made in the writ petition and the same is still pending before the Hon’ble High Court. 


0. The perusal of record reveals that Petitioner was on sick rolls upto 7.2.205 and thereafter he was examined by 
specialist Doctor of Respondent Hospital and he was found fit for duty. Despite being found fit for duty he did not 
join duty and moved an application for extension of sick leave from 2.2.20I5. As Petitioner was found fit for duty on 
medical examination, his application for sick leave was not granted. Despite it, Petitioner remained absent from duty 
without sanction of leave after 7.2.20I5 and onwards. However, Petitioner failed to produce any explanation or 
evidence to justify his absence from duty for the alleged said period. Thus, he remained absent from duty without 
sanction or sufficient cause and over staying beyond sanctioned leave. Therefore, he was rightly held guilty of 
charge of absence from duty as overstayed beyond sanctioned leave under Standing Order २०.25.3] of the Company. 


ll. However, procedure for applying sick leave by an employee of the Company is provided under Company’s 
Standing Order that the sick leave shall be granted subject to production of “fit” and “unfit” certificate. If the Colliery 
Medical Officer is not available at the company hospital/dispensary, the medical certificate issued by the Coal Mines 
Welfare Association or by any Registered Medical Practitioner can be entertained. Further, it is provided that the 
sick leave of the employee shall be granted subject to acceptance of this certificate, so produced and the employees 
fitness. But in the present matter, Petitioner was found fit for duty on medical examination and he failed to produce 
any unfit certificate obtained from Colliery Medical Officer for sanction of extended sick leave from 2.2.205 to 
0.3.205. Therefore, in the absence of such unfit certificate, Petitioner was not entitled for extended sick leave, 
from 2.2.20l5 onwards. As Petitioner did not join his duty after 7.2.20I5, hence, he was treated as absent from 
duty without any reasonable cause. Therefore, he was rightly held guilty of charge of absence from duty without any 
reasonable cause. 


2. Secondly, Petitioner was held guilty of charge under Standing Order No.25.] of the Company. In this context, 
Respondent contended that Respondent made a complaint with ACB against the Petitioner for his corrupt actions. 
Petitioner has taken the plea that the Respondent has intentionally fixed him by stating that the Petitioner is having 
the huge amount in his bank account from 2004 to 20 by way of taking money in the name of transfer of employees 
from one place to another and Respondent has not provided the alleged transfers file. Petitioner has also submitted 
that he was not connected with alleged transfer in any manner and Respondent failed to prove the charges against 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 483 


him that he collected huge amount in the name of transfers of employees. Further, Petitioner submitted that the 
Respondent without any valid ground have framed second charge against the Petitioner. Further, it is submitted that 
Respondent and inquiry officer has exceeded their limit that it is not under the purview of the fraud, dishonesty as per 
the Respondent’s company Standing Orders. Further, Petitioner submitted that he has not committed any theft of 
any amounts whatsoever in nature and nor committed any fraud of any amount of the company at any point of time or 
caused any loss to the Respondent company or its property. Petitioner submits that enquiry proceedings pertaining 
to the charge under Standing Order No.25.] is void abinitio. 


3. In view of the above submissions made by Petitioner, perused the record of the enquiry proceeding. The 
record of enquiry proceeding reveals that charge sheeted employee has admitted the receipt of the money of 
Rs.50,000/- from each of the employees totalling to Rs.3,00,000/- in his SB account No.6360 and counter foils has 
also been submitted by CSE. Further, from the record of Enquiry it is established that ५७४, MW7 (management 
witnesses) have paid money into CSE’s SB account No. 6360 and CSE was involved in unethical ways of collecting 
money on the pretext of arranging transfers to the employees. Further, Enquiry report reflects that MWI to MW6 
have relationship or contacts with CSE. Further , ५७४] has stated that they have paid money to CSE without any 
guarantee like promissory note. Whereas, CSE’s claim that he had received the amounts as hand loans. Further, CSE 
has taken the plea that he has received these hand loan amounts from ५४] to MW6 for maintenance of union 
activities. Under the facts and circumstances of the case the plea of CSE appears unbelievable as all these employees 
have admitted to have given money as hand loan to CSE. It is utter surprise to one’s common sense of prudent man 
that why each employee will deposit the similar amount of Rs.50,000/- in the Petitioner account. These transactions 
in the Petitioner’s account irresistibly indicates that these amounts were paid to Petitioner for getting transfers of the 
choice of employees. Further, ०७४] to MW6 in the evidence has also proved the fact of receipt of Rs.8,47,644/- 
by CSE. However, Petitioner submits that he has taken money from his friend Mr. Sekhar from USA and he 
submitted copies of documents related to money transfer from foreign account to his account No.6360. CSE has also 
admitted that he has received Rs. 7,74,000/- from INTUC during the year 2007-3 and out of the above amount he 
has received the amount to the extent of Rs. 3,39,000/- during the year 2004-20ll. But, CSE the Petitioner, utterly 
failed to furnish justifiable explanation in respect of such huge amounts credited into his bank account by the 
employees of the Company. Although, CSE has submitted documentary proof for receiving the money from LIC 
(money back policy) to the extent of Rs.,6,300/- during the year 2004-20ll, but regarding rest of the amount 
credited in his account during the alleged period he failed to furnish plausible explanation. Thus, as per record there 
is ample documentary evidence of money transaction in the bank account of the Petitioner during alleged period 
which is disproportionate to his known source of income and for which Petitioner failed to furnish explanation. 
However, Petitioner being employee of the Respondent company, is duty bound to explain about disproportionate 
asset/money found in his possession, but failed to do so. Thus, it has been established that the cash deposited in his 
account was disproportionate to his known sources of income. Now, onus of proof shift upon the CSE to explain 
how and from whom he has received this amount, as this fact is within the special/specific knowledge of CSE, It is 
not the case of Petitioner that there is no evidence on record against the CSE to substantiate the charge against him 
under Standing Order No.25.!. However, Petitioner submits that the charge under clause 25.] is not proved against 
him as he has not committed any fraud or dishonesty. On the basis of evidence of passbook and statement of account 
of Petitioner, it is established that unexplained huge amount was found to be credited in the bank account of 
Petitioner in the alleged period and that amount was disproportionate to his known source of income. The 
explanation for the huge amount of deposits in his account has been furnished by the CSE but that was of feeble 
nature and hence, not acceptable. 


4. However, as regards jurisdiction of Tribunal to interfere in the dismissal order of the Petitioner from service 
passed by the Respondent company, it is settled law that when the enquiry is held, fair and proper against the 
employee, in the absence of any allegation of victimization or unfair labour practice, the Labour Court has no power 
to interfere with the punishment imposed However, Petitioner has not taken the plea and proved that he was 
victimized by Respondent Management or unfair labour practice was adopted by the Respondent. Hence, no 
question arises for interference in the dismissal order of Petitioner. 


Further, as regards question of punishment, in the case Karnataka Bank Limited versus A. Mohan Raj, Hon'ble 
Supreme Court of India have held that, “Proportionality of the punishment, it is for the disciplinary authority, not 
for the courts to decide as to which punishment be imposed on a delinquent having admitted the misconduct, hence 
the interference of High Court was uncalled for.” 


Further, in the case of Employers Bokaro Colliery vs. Concerned Workman, the Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held, 


“In the absence of challenge the validity to the fairness of domestic enquiry, the court should be reluctant either to 
interfere with the final findings recorded by Enquiry Officer for the punishment awarded by competent Authority.” 


5. From the perusal of the record of the enquiry proceedings, it reflects that there is ample evidence on record 
that huge amount was credited in two bank accounts of the Petitioner and that was disproportionate to his known 
source of income. Petitioner utterly failed to furnish justifiable explanation before authority in this regard hence he 


484 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


was held guilty of charge under Standing Orders No.25.! of Company. I am constrained to hold that Petitioner’s 
claim is not a case of no evidence or order of Disciplinary Authority suffers from perversity, hence, I find no reason 
to interfere in the order of dismissal of pw passed by Disciplinary Authority. 


In this context, Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, in the case of State of Karnataka versus N Ganga Raj in Civil 
Appeal No.807 of 2024, date of decision 4 February 2020, have held, 


9. In B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India & Ors.3, again, a three Judge Bench of this Court has held that power of 
judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is made. Power of 
judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion 
which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eyes of the court. The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial 
review does not act as an appellate authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own independent 
findings on the evidence.It was held as under: 


# 72, Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is made. 


Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the 
conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the court. When an inquiry is conducted on 
charges of misconduct by a public servant, the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether the inquiry was 
held by a competent officer or whether rules of natural justice are complied with. Whether the findings or conclusions 
are based on some evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and 
authority to reach a finding of fact or conclusion. But that finding must be based on some evidence. Neither the 
technical rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding. 
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is 3 
(995) 6 SCC 749 entitled to hold that the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge. The Court/Tribunal in its power 
of judicial review does not act as appellate authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own 
independent findings on the evidence. The Court/Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the proceedings 
against the delinquent officer in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of statutory 
rules prescribing the mode of inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the disciplinary authority is 
based on no evidence. If the conclusion or finding be such as no reasonable person would have ever reached, the 
Court/Tribunal may interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to 
the facts of each case. 


उ., The disciplinary authority is the sole judge of facts. Where appeal is presented. The appellate authority has co- 
extensive power to reappreciate the evidence or the nature of punishment. In a disciplinary inquiry the strict proof of 
legal evidence and findings on that evidence are not relevant. Adequacy of evidence or reliability of evidence cannot 
be permitted to be canvassed before the Court/Tribunal. In Union of India v. H.C. Goel (964) 4 SCR 787॥, this 
Court held at page 728 that if the conclusion, upon consideration of the evidence, reached by the disciplinary 
authority, is perverse or suffers from patent error on the face of the record or based on no evidence at all, a writ of 
certiorari could be issued.” 


34. In State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur v. Nemi Chand Nalwaya 5, this Court held that the courts will not act as an 
appellate court and reassess the evidence led in the domestic enquiry, nor interfere on the ground that another view is 
possible on the material on record. If the enquiry has been fairly and properly held and the findings are based on 
evidence, the question of adequacy of the evidence or the reliable nature of the evidence will not be ground for 
interfering with the findings in departmental enquiries. The Court held as under: 


Supreme Court have held that, “Once the evidence has been accepted, the departmental enquiry in exercise of the 
power of jurisdiction the tribunal or the High Court could not interfere with the finding of these facts regarding by re- 
appreciating the evidence as if the courts are the appellate authority.” 


Similarly, in the present matter also Enquiry was held by competent authority following principles of natural justice. 


Further, in the case of B.C. Chaturvedi vrs. Union of India, 996 (72) FLR 366 the Hon’ble Supreme Court 
while hearing the case of assets found in possession of employee that was disproportionate to his known source 
of income have held:- 


It is true that a three-judge Bench of this Court in Krishanand's case (supra) held in para 33, that if the excess was 
comparatively small (it was less than /0% of the total income in that case), it would be right to hold that the assets 
found in the possession of the accused were not disproportionate to his known source of income raising the 
presumption under sub-section (3) of Section 5. It is to be remembered that the said principle was evolved by this 
Court to give benefit of doubt, due to inflationary trend in the appreciation of the value of the assets. The benefit 
thereof appears to be the maximum. The reason being that if the percentage begins to rise in each case, it gets 
extended till it reaches the level of incredulity to give the benefit of doubt. It would, therefore, be inappropriate, 
indeed undesirable, to extend the principle of deduction beyond 40% in calculating disproportionate assets of a 
delinquent officer. 


A review of the above legal position would establish that the disciplinary authority, and on appeal the appellate 


[भाग [ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 485 


authority, being fact-finding authorities have exclusive power to consider the evidence with a view to maintain 
discipline. They are invested with the discretion to impose appropriate punishment keeping in view the magnitude or 
gravity of the misconduct. The High Court/Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally 
substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some other penalty. It the punishment imposed by the disciplinary 
authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould 
the relief, either directing the disciplinary/appellate authority to reconsider the penalty imposed, or to shorten the 
litigation, it may itself, in exceptional and rare cases impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in support 
thereof. 


Hence, in the present matter, CSE was found in possession of huge amount of money in his two bank accounts and no 
plausible explanation has been furnished by the CSE. Thus, amount deposited into the account of CSE in cash was 
disproportionate to his known source of income. Therefore, he was rightly held guilty of dishonesty under Standing 
Orders No.25.l of Company and consequently was dismissed from service. Thus, the order of dismissal of Petitioner 
passed by Respondent is not of such nature to shake the conscious of court. 


6. On going through record of enquiry proceeding following facts are unequivocally established regarding 
charge under Clause 25. of Standing Orders 


A) Petitioner was charge sheeted for committed misconduct under clause 25.! of Company’s Standing Orders. 


B) That he was found in possession of huge amounts which were lying in his bank SB account No. 
2540000006360 for the period from April 2004 to December 20il, wherein salary related income of CSE was 
credited along with the interest on the outstanding balances and also unexplained other cash deposits. As per record, a 
total of Rs.90,97,876/- was credited into the bank account of CSE during the period from April, 2004 to December, 
20ll. Out of this, total amount of Rs.!7,20,494/- was credited towards salary, bonus, exgracia, incentive, festival 
advance and interest. The balance amount of Rs.73,77,382/- was credited in the CSE account mostly in the form of 
cash deposits apart from deposits through cheques. Whereas, this account of CSE was having an opening balance of 
7६.३ |,64]/- as on .4.2004. Petitioner failed to explain and account for such disproportionate amount credited in 
his account in cash during alleged period apart from salary. 


C) Further, in the second account No. 2540!0000240434 with IOB, SCHO branch Kothagudem, of CSE an 
amount of Rs.26,55,32l/- was deposited during the period March 2007 to September 20ll. As on .3.2007 there 
was no opening balance in this bank account. This amount was also not explained by the CSE and hence, it was also 
found disproportionate to his known source of income. Admittedly, most of the amount was credited into the 
Petitioner’s account through cash deposits. The defence witnesses have admitted the fact that they have deposited the 
cash amount of Rs.50,000/- each into the account of the Petitioner. Thus, plea of giving hand loan amount to 
Petitioner is not found plausible. 


7. Thus, the document on record goes to reveal that the balance of Rs.73,77,382/- in SB account of the Petitioner 
and 7२5.26,55,32 |/- in other account of the Petitioner was undisputedly found disproportionate to his known source of 
income, i.e., salary income. Therefore, Enquiry Officer has rightly come to the conclusion that huge amount 
deposited in his bank account was disproportionate to the known source of income of Petitioner. As the Petitioner 
failed to furnish plausible explanation regarding said disproportionate asset of amount deposited in his two bank 
accounts, irresistibly it can be concluded that these amounts were obtained by Petitioner by dishonest means and he 
was rightly held guilty under Standing Orders No.25.]. 


8. Once the fact of disproportionate asset to the known source of income of Petitioner has been proved, now 
the onus of proof is shifted upon the Petitioner to explain the circumstances, how and under what circumstances such 
huge amount in cash was credited into this bank account. Section 06 of the Indian Evidence Act provides that 
when any fact is specially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him. But 
CSE/ Petitioner failed to discharge his burden of proof by his defence evidence in this regard. Therefore, in view 
of the above, CSE was rightly held guilty of charge of possessing huge amount in his two bank accounts, that was 
disproportionate to his known source of income. As regards plea of the Petitioner that there is no sufficient evidence 
on record to prove charge against Petitioner, it is settled law that sufficiency of evidence is not required in the 
Departmental Enquiry and mere preponderance of probability is required to prove charge against CSE. Hence, plea of 
Petitioner in this regard is untenable. 


9. Although, Petitioner has submitted that Respondent did not examine any witness in the enquiry in support of 
charge and has submitted only copy of statement of witness. The record of enquiry proceeding goes to show that the 
charge under clause 25.] of dishonest misconduct of charge sheeted employee was based on the basis of 
documentary evidence i.e., statement of two bank accounts of Petitioner and these statements of account have been 
submitted and admitted by CSE himself. It is settled law that the facts admitted need not to be proved. Hence, the 
examination of witness as oral evidence was not necessary in the present matter. There is ample documentary 
evidence on record to support the charge against CSE. Therefore, I find no force in the argument of CSE. The said 
plea of the Petitioner is untenable. 


486 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


20. Therefore, in view of the fore gone discussion and law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court as discussed 
above, I am of the considered view that there is no occasion to interfere in the finding of the Enquiry Officer as well 
as the order of dismissal passed by Respondent Disciplinary Authority for committing misconduct by Petitioner 
under clause 25.] and clause 25.3 of the Company’s Standing Orders. Therefore, the action of the Respondent in 
terminating the services of the Petitioner is held legal and justified. 


This Point is answered accordingly. 


2l. Point No.III:- In view of the fore gone discussion and finding given at Points No.I & II, the Petitioner is not 
entitled for any relief and petition is liable to be dismissed as being unfounded. 


Thus, Point No.III is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion and finding at Points No. I & II, I am of the considered view that the 
action of the Respondent in terminating the services of the Petitioner Sri G. Sampath Kumar, Sr. Asst. Superintendent 
vide office proceeding dated 2.3.20i9 and proceedings dated 25.2.208 is held legal and justified. Hence, the 
Petitioner is not entitled to any relief as prayed for. As such, the petition filed by the Petitioner deserves to be 
dismissed as devoid of merits and hence the petition stands dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Dictated to Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed by me on this 
the 27" day of | September, 2024. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2044.— sires विवाद अधिनियम, (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
आयुक्त, पूर्वी दिल्‍ली नगर निगम, शाहदरा, दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और सचिव, एमसीडी जनरल मजदूर 
यूनियन, शाहजहां रोड, नई दिल्ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय- 
4 नई दिल्ली पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया (7/209) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय 
सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 25.40.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42044/450/2046-आईआर(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30 October, 2024 


9.0. 204].—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 7/209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court —I New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
The Commissioner, East Delhi Municipal Corporation, Shahdara, Delhi, and The Secretary, MCD General 


[भाग ए--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 487 


Mazdoor Union, Shahjahan Road, New Delhi,, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the 
Central Government on 25.0.2024. 


[No. L-420/50/206-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - I, 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No. 7/209 
The Secretary, 
MCD General Mazdoor Union, 
Room No. 95, Barrack No. I/l0, Jamnagar House, 
Shahjahan Road, 
New Delhi-i00I. 
Workman... 
Versus 
The Commissioner, 
East Delhi Municipal Corporation, 
Udyog Sadan, Near Patparganj, Shahdara, 
Delhi-0092. 
Management... 
AWARD 


In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No-L- 
420/50/20l6-IR(DU)) dated 7.02.20I8 under clause (d) of sub-section () and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of 
the Act, for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of Management of East Delhi Municipal corporation is justified in imposing the penalty of 
reduction of two stages in time scale of pay for a period of three years along with the effect of postponing future 
increments imposed upon the disputant workman Sh. Surinder and further the retention of 50% amount during the 
suspension period wef 7/3.97.7992 to 76.06./993 is fair, just & legal? If not, to what benefits the disputant 
workman is entitled to?” 


2. In the reference order, the appropriate Government commanded the parties raising the dispute to file statement 
of claim, complete with relevant documents, list of reliance and witnesses with this Tribunal within 5 days of receipt 
of the reference order and to forward a copy of such statement of claim to the opposite parties involved in the dispute. 
Claim statement was filed on behalf of the claimant. 


3. Thereafter, none appeared on behalf of the claimant nor his A/R appeared despite providing a number of 
opportunities, claimant have not appeared to substantiate his claim. 


4. Since the workman has neither put in his appearance nor he led any evidence so as to prove his cause against 
the management, this Tribunal is left with no choice, except to pass a ‘No Dispute/Claim’ award. Let this award be 
sent to the appropriate Government, as required under Section |7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, for publication. 


Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 
Date: 7.0.2024 


488 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2042.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
नगर निगम दिल्‍ली, 6 मिंटो रोड, नई दिल्ली; मेसर्स बी.वी.जी. इंडिया fares, 5 के.जी. मार्ग, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र 
के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री सुन्दर लाल, कामगार , द्वारा -उपाध्यक्ष, (दिल्ली राज्य एचएमएस), अशोक होटल स्टाफ 
क्वार्टर, नई दिल्‍ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम ara नई दिल्ली 
पंचाट (संदर्भ संखया 20/2047) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट 
कॉपी के साथ 25.40.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-485-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


9.0. 2042.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 20/207) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court —I New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
Municipal Corporation Delhi, 6 Minto Road, New Delhi ;M/s B.V.G. India Ltd., 5 K.G. Marg, New Delhi, and 
Shri Sunder Lal ,Worker ,Through-The Vice President, (Delhi State HMS),Ashok Hotel Staff Qtrs, New Delhi, 
which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 25.0.2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-85-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI - 
ROOM NO.207, ROUSE AVENUE COURT COMPLEX, 
NEW DELHI. 
ID No. 20/207 
Shri Sunder Lal S/o Shri Mool Chand, 
Through Sh. S.S. Upadhyay, Vice President, (Delhi State HMS), 
Qtr. No. C-47, Ashok Hotel Staff Qtrs, 
New Delhi-002 


Workman... 
Versus 
l. Management of MCD Dr. S.P.M. Civic Centre, 
6 Minto Road, New Delhi-!0002 
2; M/s B.V.G. India Ltd., 
06, I*t Floor Mercantile House, 5 K.G. Marg, 
New Delhi-i0002. 
Management... 
AWARD 


l. This is an application Under Section 2A of the I.D. Act whereby, the applicant made prayer that his termination 
from the service on 30.2.20I5 by the management which be declare illegal and unjustified and he be reinstated with 
full back wages, it is the case of the applicant/workman that he has been working with the management. He has not 
been provided any legal facilities. He was illegally terminated from his service on 30.2.205 without any rhyme or 
reason and without conducted any domestic enquiry by the management. He has initiated the conciliation proceeding 
but, no result. Hence, he had filed the present claim petition. 


[भाग त---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 489 


2. Thereafter, none appeared on behalf of the claimant nor his A/R appeared despite providing a number of 
opportunities, claimant have not appeared to substantiate his claim. 


3. Hence, in these circumstances this tribunal has no option except to pass the no dispute award. No dispute award 
is passed accordingly. File is consigned to the record room. A copy of this award is hereby send to the appropriate 
government for notification under section !7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 
Date: 7.0.2024 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2043.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
शाखा प्रबंधक, द्वारा - रिलायंस कॉम लिमिटेड, रिलायंस एचआर सर्विसेज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के 
संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री कैलाश पांडे, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम 
न्‍्यायालय-4 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संखया 243/2045) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो 
केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 25.40.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-486-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2043.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 243/205) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court —I New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
The Branch Manager, Through - Reliance Com. Ltd., Reliance HR Services Private Limited, New Delhi, and 
Shri Kailash Pandey, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
25.0.2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-86-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI २०0.। NEW 
DELHI. 


ID.No. 243/205 
Sh. Kailash Pandey, 
R/o D-48-B, West Vinod Nagar, 
Delhi-0092. 
Workman 
Versus 
Reliance HR Services Private Limited, 
Through its Branch Manager, Reliance Com. Ltd., 
Ranjeet Hotel, Turkman Gate, 
Near Guru Nanak Hospital, 
New Delhi. 


Management 


4820 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


l. This is an application under Section 2-A of the I.D. Act whereby, the applicant made prayer that his termination 
from the service on 2!.0.205 by the management which be declare illegal and unjustified and he be reinstated with 
full back wages. He has not been provided any legal facilities. When the workman went to join his job he was 
illegally terminated form his service on 2[.0.205 without any rhyme or reason and without conducted any domestic 
enquiry by the management. He has initiated the conciliation proceeding but, no result. Hence, he had filed the 
present claim petition. 


2. Management appeared and filed the rebuttal written statement. After that, rejoinder was filed and issues were 
framed. And after that, case was listed for claimant evidence for 22.!.207. After that, claimant evidence was also 
filed. And after that, none appeared on behalf of the claimant nor his A/R appeared despite providing a number of 
opportunities, claimant have not appeared to substantiate his claim. 


3. Hence, in these circumstances this tribunal has no option except to pass the no dispute award. No dispute award 
is passed accordingly. File is consigned to the record room. A copy of this award is hereby send to the appropriate 
government for notification under section !7 of the I.D. Act, 947. 


Let a copy of this Award be sent for publication as required under Section 7 of Act. 
Justice Vikas Kunvar SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 
Date: 7.0.2024 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2044.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेसर्स मदर डेयरी He एंड वेजीटेबल प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, मंगोलपुरी इंडस्ट्रियल एरिया tot-4, नई दिल्ली; मेसर्स विजय 
लक्ष्मी मंसोल प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, रोहिणी, नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रमेश एवं i2 
अन्य,कर्मचारी, द्वारा -हिंदुस्तान इंजीनियरिंग एवं जनरल मजदूर यूनियन, कर्मपुरा, नई दिल्ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-4 नई दिल्‍ली Gare (संदर्भ संख्या 49/2023) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 25.40.2024 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42044/52/2022-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2044.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 49/2023) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court —I New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to 
M/s Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd., Mangolpuri Industrial Area Phase-l, New Delhi ;M/s Vijay 
Laxmi Mansol Pvt. Ltd., Rohini, New Delhi, and Shri Ramesh & 2 others, Worker, Through- Hindustan 
Engineering & General Mazdoor Union, Karmpura, New Delhi, which was received along with soft copy of the 
award by the Central Government on 25.0.2024. 


[No. L-420]/52/2022-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


[भाग त---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 482 


ANNEXURE 


THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT DELHI २०0.। NEW 
DELHI. 
ID.No. 49/2023 
Sh. Ramesh & |2 others, 
Rept. By Hindustan Engineering & General Mazdoor Union, 
A-93, Karmpura, New Delhi-!l00I5. 


आकर... उड़ Workman 
Versus 

l. M/s Mother Dairy Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd., 

Mangolpuri Industrial Area Phase-l, New Delhi-!0083. 
2. M/s Vijay Laxmi Mansol Pvt. Ltd., 

204-206, Plot No. 3, Garawal Plaza, 

Sector-5, Rohini, New Delhi-!0085. 

व इक Management 


AWARD 


In the present case, a reference was received from the appropriate Government vide letter No. L- 
420/52/2022 (IR(DU)) dated 27/0/2023 under clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of 
the Act, for adjudication of a dispute, terms of which are as under: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether claim of Hindustan Engineering and General Mazdoor Union, New Delhi vide letter dated 
29.06.2020 in respect of Sh. Ramesh and II others (list attached) to the management of M/s Mother Dairy 
Fruit & Vegetable Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi and M/s Vijay Laxmi Mansol Private Limited, New Delhi for 
reinstatement, bonus for 3 years and others dues, are proper, legal and justified? If yes, to what relief the 
disputant is entitled and what direction, if any, is necessary in the matter?” 


2. Both parties were put to notice and the claimant filed the claim statement. 
3. However, the matter has been amicably settled between the parties. 


5. The claimants Sh. Ramesh & others vide separate statement made before this Tribunal on 08.0.2024 stated that 
he has settled the matter in terms of MOS dated 08.0.2024, which is Ex-C-I, which is duly signed by them with the 
management in full & final settlement of claims, by way of Cheque drawn on ICICI Bank, as full and final settlement 
of all their claims, as such, it is held that the claim/ dispute of the workmen/claimants stand finally settled. Settlement 
of the parties shall form integral part of this Award. Award is passed accordingly. 


Let a copy of this Award be sent for publication as required under Section |7 of Act. 
Justice VIKAS KUNVAR SRIVASTAVA, Presiding Officer 
Date: 7.0.2024. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2045.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, (947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में,केन्द्रीय सरकार 
महाप्रबंधक (मानव संसाधन),भारत इलेक्ट्रॉनिक्स लिमिटेड,जालाहाली पोस्ट,बैंगलोर,के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और 
महासचिव, भारत इलेक्ट्रॉनिक्स वर्कर्स यूनियन, सीआईटीयू कार्यालय, यशवंतपुर, बैंगलोर, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण-सह-श्रम न्‍्यायालय,बैंगलोर, Tare (संदर्भ संखया 04 of 2022) को जैसा कि 
अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है,प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 30.40.2024 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 


[सं, एल-42042/242/2024-आईआर(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


4822 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2045.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 04 of 2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court, Bangalore as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The General Manager (HR),Bharat Electronics Limited, Jalahalli Post, Bangalore, and The General 
Secretary, Bharat Electronic Workers Union, CITU Office, Yeswanthpur, Bangalore which was received along 
with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 30.0.2024. 


[No. L-4202/22/202-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT, 
BANGALORE, CAMP COURT At HYDERABAD 


DATED : 4" OCTOBER 2024 
PRESENT : Shri IRFAN QAMAR 
Presiding Officer 
CR No. 04/2022 
I Party II Party 
General Secretary, The General Manager (HR), 
‘at Electronic Workers Union, CITU Bharat Electronics Limited, 
ce, l*' Main Road, Yeswanthpur, करा Pox 


NGalore — 560 22. BANGalore — 560 03. 


Appearances 
I Party : Sh. L Muralidhar Peshwa 
State Committee Member 
II Party : None 


l. The Government of India, Ministry of Labour vide order No. L-420/22/202-IR(DU) dated 7.0.2022 in 
exercise of the power conferred by clause (d) of sub-section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section !0 of the Industrial 
Disputes Act, |947 (hereinafter referred as “The Act’) (4 of 947) referred the following Industrial Dispute to this 
Tribunal for adjudication: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the claim of Bharat Electronics Workers Union vide letter dated 7.8.20l7 that the 
management of Bharat Electronics Limited, Bangalore has unilaterally changed service condition of non- 
executives and breach of tri-partite settlement without negotiating with the elected members of the union 
is proper, legal and justified? If yes, what reliefs the disputant are entitled and what other directions, if 
any, are necessary in the matter?” 


2. After Registering the matter notices were issued to parties. In response to the notice, the State Committee 
Member, CITU has filed letter of authorization to represent l*' Party in the ID case on 22.08.2022. But despite the 
sufficient opportunity afforded the Petitioner did not file any claim statement, it seems Petitioner don’t want to 
prosecute his case. 


3. Therefore, in view of the above “No Claim” Award is passed. Transmit. 
AWARD 
No Claim Award is passed. Transmit 
(Dictated to Secretary to Court, transcribed by him, corrected and signed by me on 
4" October 2024) 
IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4823 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 2046.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, t947 (4947 का 44) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्‍्यायालय,आसनसोल के Gare (सन्दर्भ संख्या 38/2023) को 
vor गत करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 22/40/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 
[सं. एल-22043/0॥/2024-आईआर(सीएम-)] 


मणिकंदन एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2046.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No.38/2023) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 22 //0/2024 


[No. L-2203/0/2024-IR(CM-II)] 
MANIKANDAN N,, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL 
PRESENT : Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 
Presiding Officer 
CGIT-cum-LC, Asansol 
REFERENCE NO. 38 OF 2023 
PARTIES : Raju Mahato 
v/s 


Management of Parasea colliery, Kunustoria Area of ECL 


REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the union (Workman): Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala Mazdoor Congress. 
For the management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: COAL 
STATE : WEST BENGAL 
Dated : 27.09.2024 
AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of sub-section (/) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Ministry of Labour, Government of India through the Office of the 
Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner (Central), Asansol, vide its Order No. (33)/2023/E dated 26/07/2023 has been 
pleased to refer the following dispute between the employer, that is the Management of Parasea Colliery under 
Kunustoria Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their workman for adjudication by this Tribunal 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Parasea Colliery under Kunustoria Area of M/s. ECL in 
dismissing the service of Shri Raju Mahato, U.G. Loader, UM NO- 7/0640 w.e.f. ///76.47.2074 is justified? 
If not what relief the concerned workman is entitled to.” 


l. On receiving Order No. (33)/2023/E dated 26/07/2023 from the Office of the Deputy Chief Labour 


4824 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Commissioner (Central), Asansol, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Government of India, for adjudication of the 
dispute Reference case No. 38 of 2023 was registered on 28/07/2023 and an order was passed for issuing notice to 
the parties through registered post, directing them to appear and submit their written statements along with relevant 
documents in support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2. Raju Mahato, dismissed workman filed his written statement through Mr. Rakesh Kumar, President, Koyala 
Mazdoor Congress. Fact of his case leading to this Industrial Dispute is that Raju Mahato was posted as UG Loader at 
Parasea colliery under Kunustoria Area of ECL. He was unable to attend his duty from 0/0/200 due to illness of 
his wife. Being only adult member in his family to look after his wife, he could not attend his duty and subsequently 
himself fell ill preventing him from joining duty. Management of the company issued a charge sheet against him on 
26/02/20l] under clause 26.29 for his unauthorized absence for more than ten days and under clause 26.23 of the 
certified standing orders for his habitual absence without any sufficient cause. 


3. Raju Mahato submitted reply to the charge sheet and informed that due to illness of his wife and himself he was 
unable to join duty. Workman also participated in the enquiry proceeding and requested the management 
representative and the Enquiry Officer to allow him to join duty but his plea was not considered. Management of 
Parasea colliery initiated a Note Sheet proposing punishment to the workman and the General Manager of Kunustoria 
Area issued an order of dismissal of Raju Mahato on 6/l!/20ll. After dismissal Raju Mahato submitted an 
application praying for mercy but the management did not consider his mercy petition according to terms of 
Memorandum of Settlement dated 22/05/2007. It is the contention of the workman that for absence of four months 
and few days management has imposed a punishment upon him which is harsh and disproportionate to the nature of 
misconduct. Workman has no any other source of income for his livelihood and to meet the expenditure of his family 
members and children. It is urged that the punishment imposed is unjustified and no second show cause Notice was 
issued to him before dismissal, which is a clear violation of guidelines of Hon’ble Supreme Court and the Circular of 
the Coal India Limited. It is prayed that order of dismissal be declared illegal and unjustified and the workman may 
be reinstated in his service with full back wages. 


4. Management of the Parasea colliery contested the Industrial Dispute by filing a written statement on |2/09/2023. 
According to the management of ECL Raju Mahato was employed at Parasea colliery having UM No. 0640 and 
was designated as UG Loader. He remained absent from duty from 0!/0/20i0 without any authorized leave or 
intimation. A charge sheet was issued to him on 26/02/20i] on charge of absence from duty for more than ten days 
without any sanctioned leave and without reasonable cause as per clause 26.29 and for his habitual absence from duty 
without sufficient cause, as per clause 26.23 of the certified standing orders of the company. Workman submitted 
reply to the charge sheet but the management decided to hold a domestic enquiry in respect of the charges levelled. 
An enquiry was conducted complying the principle of Natural Justice. Workman participated in the enquiry and he 
was given full opportunity to defend himself and cross-examine the management representative. Raju Mahato 
accepted the charges levelled against him and finally the Disciplinary Authority terminated him from the service of 
the company vide letter No. A-KNT/P&IR/26/(C)/2685 dated 6/l/20i] of the General Manager, Kunustoria Area. 
On 05/03/2023 the union raised an Industrial Dispute by filing an application before the conciliation officer i.e. ALC 
(C) at Asansol contending that no charge sheet and Notice of Enquiry were served upon the workman and 
management dismissed him from service without considering mercy petition and thereby misrepresented the facts of 
the case. It is contended that workman was dismissed on |6/l/20] and Industrial Dispute was raised after more than 
ten years i.e. on 05/03/2023 which indicates that workman was not serious regarding his job. 


5. Management further stated that workman was a habitual absentee and in the last three years, prior to his 
dismissal, his attendance was unsatisfactory. It is specified that workman attended duty for only ninety eight days in 
the year 2008, seventy days in the year 2009 and sixty three days in the year 20l0. On four earlier occasions 
opportunity was granted to him by issuing four warnings dated 26/03/2003, 8/08/2003, 28/05/2008 and 27/06/2008. 
Management relied upon a decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Nedungadi Bank Limited Vs K.P. 
Madhavan Kutty and Others reported in (2000) 2 SEC 455 and submitted that Hon’ble court held that dispute raised 
after long time was stale which cannot be assumed to be in existence and accordingly management prayed for 
dismissal of the case. 


6. In this backdrop of facts, question which now emerge for consideration is whether the dismissal of Raju Mahato 
from service by the management of Parasea colliery is justified and what relief the concerned workman is entitled to. 


7. In support of the case the workman has filed an affidavit on 27/03/2024 and examined himself as WW-I. In his 
affidavit workman has reiterated his case disclosed in written statement and stated that charge sheet was issued on 
26/02/20ll. He participated in the enquiry and stated the circumstances under which he could not attend duty. In 
Paragraph seven of affidavit-in-chief the workman stated that management of the colliery proposed for allowing him 
to join duty with a recommendation of stoppage of one SPRA as punishment. Management at Area level did not 
consider the recommendation of the Agent and decided to award punishment of dismissal without issuing a second 
show cause Notice. He had also submitted a mercy appeal in the light of the Memorandum of Settlement dated 
22/05/2007. The workman was absent for four months and few days which is less than nine months and at relevant 
time his age was below forty five years for which his mercy appeal should be considered as per Memorandum of 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4825 


Settlement. It is ascertained that punishment awarded was disproportionate to the alleged misconduct. In course of 
evidence-in-chief on oath the workman produced the following documents: 


(i) copy of Identity Card of Raju Mahato is produced as Exhibit फ-। 

(ii) copy of charge sheet dated 26/02/20] is produced as Exhibit W-2 

(ii) copy of Note Sheet issued by the Agent, Parasea colliery dated l/06/20] is produced 85 Exhibit W-3 
(iv) copy of order of dismissal issued on |6/!/20] is produced as Exhibit W-4 

(v) copy of corrigendum dated 30/ [/20] stating date of termination as 6/0 [/20 is produced as Exhibit W-5 
(vi) copy of letter issued by the Welfare Officer (Trainee) is produced as Exhibit W-6 


In cross-examination witness stated that he participated in the enquiry but did not submit documents relating to 
illness. He denied suggestion that his absence was not due to illness of himself and his wife. Witness further stated 
that no second show cause Notice was issued to him. 


8. In support of their case management examined Mr. Soram Sanjoy Singh as MW-I. He filed affidavit-in-chief and 
produced the following documents: 


(i) copy of charge sheet is produced as Exhibit -] 
(ii) copy of letter dated 28/03/20] related to the appointment of Enquiry Officer is produced as Exhibit M-2 


(iii) copies of Notices of Enquiry dated 03/06/20ll and 4/05/20ll are produced as Exhibits M-3 and M-4 
respectively 


(iv) copy of warning letter by which Raju Mahato was permitted to resume his duty is produced as Exhibit M-5 
(v) copy of Enquiry proceeding report and findings in four pages collectively is produced as Exhibit M-6 
(vi) copy of letter of dismissal dated 6//20I issued by the General Manager is produced as Exhibit M-7 


In his cross-examination, management witness stated that enquiry proceeding was concluded on 04/06/20I and Note 
Sheet was issued by the Dy. CME/Agent, Parasea colliery on /06/20ll whereby he recommended that charged 
employee should be allowed to join duty with stoppage of one SPRA as punishment. Witness stated that Agent is not 
the Disciplinary Authority and he did not have the occasion to consider the Enquiry Report for imposing punishment. 
Witness could not state why the management took five months’ time to dismiss the workman after conclusion of the 
enquiry proceeding. There is a clear admission on part of management witness that no second show cause Notice was 
issued to the charged employee and he was also unable to state as to what decision was taken by the management 
relating to the mercy petition of Raju Mahato who was called to the Head Quarters. 


9. Mr. Rakesh Kumar, union representative advancing argument on behalf of dismissed workman submitted that 
Raju Mahato was unable to attend duty for four months and few days due to illness of his wife but the management 
issued Charge Sheet against him on 26/02/20ll. When he reported for duty a domestic enquiry was started against 
him on the charge of unauthorised absence for more than ten days and for his habitual absence in the previous three 
years. Workman participated in the enquiry proceeding and disclosed that due to his wife’s illness he was not able to 
attend duty. Management did not consider his plea and issued a Note Sheet where Agent of the colliery recommended 
to allow him join duty after stoppage of one SPRA as punishment. It is argued on behalf of the dismissed workman 
that management issued a letter of dismissal against him on 6/फ /20]] terminating his service with immediate effect 
without having issued a second show cause Notice as mandated by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of 
Union of India and Others Vs. Md. Ramzan Khan [AIR (99) SC 47] and which was adopted by the Director 
(P&IR) of Coal India Limited in their circular No. CIL C-5A (vi) /50774/28 dated 2/05/994. It is inter alia argued 
that the punishment of dismissal from service is disproportionate to the charges levelled against the workman. It is 
submitted that order of dismissal is arbitrary, illegal and the same is required to be set aside. Mr. Rakesh Kumar 
further submitted that workman after dismissal had prayed for mercy and the management had called the charged 
employee and recommended a proposal for his reinstatement in service but the matter is still pending and undecided. 
According to the union a Memorandum of Settlement dated 22/05/2007 was signed between various unions and the 
Management Representatives wherein it was agreed that if period of absence was less than nine months and age of the 
employee was less than forty five years, management would consider his/her mercy application. However, in the 
present case management has not taken into consideration of the mercy petition. It has been prayed that workman may 
be reinstatement in service with back wages and all other consequential benefits. 


0. Mr. 7. K. Das, learned advocate for the management of Parasea colliery argued that charges levelled against the 
workman under clause 26.23 and 26.29 of the certified standing orders applicable to the workman have been well 
established. It is submitted that workman never denied that he was not absent from duty from 0I/0/200 till 
26/02/20l] without any information to the management. Charge of habitual absence during the year 2008, 2009 and 
200 is also evident from the enquiry proceeding. It would appear that he has not served two hundred forty days in 
these preceding years. According to the learned advocate workman participated in the enquiry proceeding but he 


4826 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


failed to produce medical documents in support of his wife’s illness. Workman had been provided reasonable 
opportunities to establish his case against the charges levelled but he was not successful in doing so. Therefore, 
management of the Parasea colliery is fully justified in dismissing the workman from service. It is further pointed out 
that workman was a habitual absentee and didn’t perform his duty in a proper manner. On prior occasions minor 
punishments were passed against the workman and he was allowed to resume duty after warning but he could not 
rectify himself. Learned advocate fairly admitted that no second show cause Notice was issued to the workman before 
passing order of termination from service. It is urged that workman was terminated w.e.f. 6/l!/20I] but he did not 
raise dispute for more than ten years. Workman raised this Industrial Dispute for the first time on 05/03/2023. 
Therefore, Industrial Dispute is liable to be dismissed. 


Il. Considered the rival contentions of the union and the management in the light of referred Industrial Dispute and 
materials on record. It transpires from the evidence of workman that he had remained absent from duty without any 
information and charge sheet was issued against him on 26/02/20ll (Exhibit W-2). Charge sheet reveals that 
workman had remained absent since 0/!0/200 without any sanctioned leave. Besides such charge under clause 
26.29 for his long unauthorised absence the workman was also charged under clause 26.23 for his habitual absence 
from duty without any sufficient cause. It appears from the enquiry proceeding that workman had attended duty for 
ninety eight days in the year 2008, seventy days in the year 2009 and sixty three days in the year 200. In the written 
statement and affidavit-in-chief, workman has stated that he submitted reply against the charge sheet. During evidence 
he did not produce copy of reply. A domestic enquiry was held and a copy of enquiry proceeding report and findings 
has been produced by the management in four pages as Exhibit M-6. Workman participated in the enquiry proceeding 
held on 04/06/20. Statements of Mr. Amit Ghosh, management witness and Raju Mahato, charge sheeted workman 
were recorded. Nothing has transpired to demolish the charge and it appears to me that enquiry proceeding was 
carried out by the management providing reasonable opportunities to the workman to represent himself and adduce 
evidence in support of his defence. He has clearly admitted that he was unable to produce medical certificates and had 
not informed the management about the incident. Management appears to have followed the Principle of Natural 
Justice before holding the charge sheeted workman guilty of misconduct in respect of clauses 26.29 and 26.23 of 
certified standing order. Union produced a copy of Note Sheet dated 0/.06.20I! as Exhibit W-3 wherein the Agent 
proposed that considering past record and present unauthorised absence, the charged employee might be allowed to 
join duty after stoppage of one SPRA as punishment. Contention of the union is that order of dismissal is a 
punishment disproportionate to the misconduct and it has been passed without considering the proposal of the Agent, 
Parasea colliery. Letter of dismissal which is marked as Exhibit W-4 and M-7 reveals that the General Manager who 
is the Competent Authority and Disciplinary Authority has taken into consideration the Enquiry Officer’s report 
against the workman and has gone through the enquiry proceeding and findings of the Enquiry Officer and was of the 
opinion that there was no circumstance to award lesser punishment and therefore decided to terminate the service of 
the workman. General Manager being the Disciplinary Authority is vested with the jurisdiction to award punishment 
of any description. In doing so he ought to have born in mind that issuance of second show cause Notice and service 
of Enquiry proceeding and findings of the Enquiry Officer to the charge sheeted workman was a prerequisite before 
passing any final order/punishment. It is a settled principle of law that if the Enquiry Officer and the Disciplinary 
Authority were different persons then the charged employee should be given opportunity to make his representation in 
respect of findings made against him in the enquiry and after consideration of the representation, the Disciplinary 
Authority would be justified in passing an appropriate punishment proportionate to the charge established. 

2. In the case of Union of India and Others Vs. Md. Ramzan Khan [AIR (99) SC 47] Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India laid down as follows “When the Inquiry Officer is not the Disciplinary Authority, the delinquent 
employee has a right to receive a copy of the inquiry officer’s report before the Disciplinary Authority arrives at its 
conclusion with regard to the charges levelled against him. A denial of the inquiry officer’s report before the 
Disciplinary Authority takes its decision on the charges, is denial of opportunity to the employee to prove his 
innocence and is a breach of principles of natural justice. 7, Coal India Limited in respect of which Easter Coalfields 
Limited is a subsidiary has issued a circular No. CIL C-5A (vi)/50774/28 dated 2/05/994 wherein it has been laid 
down that a charged employee had to be supplied with a copy of enquiry proceeding and enquiry report and a second 
show cause Notice has to be issued to him before taking any final decision of removing him from service. It is an 
admitted fact that in the present case no second show cause Notice was issued to the workman. Therefore, this is a 
clear violation of the mandate of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India as finality reached by way of termination of the 
workman from service has been done in contravention of the Principle of Law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court of India as well as the circular issued by the Coal India Limited. 

3. Though this Industrial Dispute has been raised after a period of ten years from the date of dismissal of the 
workman on 6/I!/20ll, same cannot be left undecided on the ground that dispute has become stale. There is no 
limitation in respect of time for raising Industrial Dispute. Therefore, workman should get an opportunity to exercise 
law in his favour. In view of such facts and circumstances and law involved I have no hesitation to hold that order of 
dismissal issued by the General Manager, Kunustoria Area in his letter bearing No. A-KNT/P&IR/26/(C)/2685 dated 
6..20I] is not sustainable under law and the same is set aside. 

4. At this stage I am not inclined to direct the management for reinstatement of the workman in service nor to pay 
him back wages until a second show cause Notice has been served upon the workman along with copy of enquiry 


[भाग त---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4827 


proceeding and findings, and providing him an opportunity to submit representation in respect of the findings of 
enquiry. Management shall take into consideration the representation submitted by the charged employee and all other 
materials before passing any final order of any nature. Management shall also take into consideration any application 
already submitted and communicate the findings to the workman within fifteen days. 
Hence, 
ORDERED 

that the Industrial Dispute is accordingly allowed in part on contest in favour of the workman. Order of termination of 
Raju Mahato from service by letter No. A-KNT/P&IR/26/(C)/2685 dated I/6.!.20ll of the General Manager, 
Kunustoria Area is set aside. Management of Parasea colliery, Kunustoria Area shall issue a second show cause 
Notice along with enquiry proceeding and findings of Enquiry Officer to the workman within one month from the 
date of communication of Award and after considering representation and mercy petition if any, within a fortnight 
management shall communicate the findings to the workman. Let an Award be drawn up accordingly and copies be 
communicated to the Ministry of Labour and Employment for information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2047.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार ई.सी.एल. के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, आसनसोल के Gare (सन्दर्भ संख्या 45/4998) को 
प्रका Tt करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 22/05/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल -22042/290/97-आई.आर. (सी.एम-ा)|] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2047.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award ( Reference.I.D.No.45/998) of the Central Government Industrial 
Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Asansol as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management 
of E.C.L. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 22 //0/2024. 

[No. L-2202/290/97 — IR (CM-ID] 


MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL -CUM- LABOUR COURT, 
ASANSOL. 
PRESENT: Shri Ananda Kumar Mukherjee, 


Presiding Officer, 
C.G.LT-cum-L.C., Asansol. 
REFERENCE CASE NO. 45 OF 998 


PARTIES: Dilo Rabidas 
(represented by the legal heirs) 
Vs. 
Management of Ningah Colliery of ECL 

REPRESENTATIVES: 
For the Union/Workman: Ms. Debarati Konar, Advocate. 
For the Management of ECL: Mr. P. K. Das, Advocate. 
INDUSTRY: Coal. 
STATE: West Bengal. 


Dated: 23.09.2024 


4828 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


AWARD 


In exercise of powers conferred under clause (d) of Sub-section (]) and Sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the 
Industrial Disputes Act, !947 (/4 of 947), the Government of India through the Ministry of Labour, vide its Order 
No. L-2202/290/97/IR(CM-II) dated 9.08.998 has been pleased to refer the following dispute between the 
employer, that is the Management of Ningah Colliery under Sripur Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited and their 
workman for adjudication by this Tribunal. 


SCHEDULE 


“ Whether the action of the management of Ningah Colliery under Sripur Area of M/s. ECL in changing the 
year of birth of Dilu Rabidas Hauledge Khalasi as year 7936 is justified ? If not, to what relief is the 
concerned workman entitled ? ” 


l. On receiving Order No. L-2202/290/97/IR(CM-II) dated 9.08.998 from the Government of India, Ministry 
of Labour, New Delhi for adjudication of the dispute, a Reference case No. 45 of 998 was registered and an order 
was passed for issuing notice to the parties through registered post, directing them to appear and submit their written 
statements along with relevant documents in support of their claims and a list of witnesses. 


2. After registration of the Industrial Dispute the deceased workman was substituted by the legal heirs on 
03.06.2009. Mr. Sayantan Mukherjee, learned advocate, initially appeared for the union, Janta Colliery Mazdoor 
Congress and filed the written statement on 2.0l.200. In brief, the fact of the case as per pleading is that Dilo 
Rabidas was a ‘Haulage Khalasi’ at Ningah Colliery under Sripur Area of Eastern Coalfields Limited (hereinafter 
referred to as ECL). His Unique Man Number was 268303 and Coal Mines Provident Fund Account Number was 
B/56963. The workman was appointed in the year [963 and his year of birth was recorded in the Statutory Form-B 
Register of Ningah Colliery as 943. Dilo Rabidas was thereafter transferred to Sripur Seam Incline under Sripur 
Area of ECL and again transferred to Ningah Colliery from where he was illegally superannuated on 0.07.998, 
treating his year of birth as 938 instead of 943. 

3. In the year 987 the Service Record Excerpt (hereinafter referred to as SRE) was served upon the workman 
and for the first time he came to know that his year of birth was wrongly recorded as 938. Dilo Rabidas raised 
objection against his wrong year of birth, recorded in the Form-B Register of the defendant company but the 
management did not determine the age of the workman by referring him to the Apex Medical Board and without any 
basis recorded the year of birth of the workman as 4938., It is the case of the union that the year of birth of the 
workman was recorded as |943 in the Original and Statutory Form-B Register of Ningah Colliery and in the Identity 
Card issued by the erstwhile management. It is urged that the year of birth of the workman recorded in the Form-B 
Register and other records of the company is without any basis, false, vague and is not supported by any document. It 
is contended that on .2.997 a Notice of superannuation bearing Ref. No. M/N/C-6/96/83/3738 dated .2.997 
was issued by the Manager of Ningah Colliery, declaring that he shall attain the age of superannuation i.e., sixty years 
as on 0.07.998 and the management has decided to terminate his service on superannuation on 0.07.998. The 
workman requested the management for rectifying his date of birth in the Form-B Register and withdrawing the 
Notice of superannuation but the management paid no heed to his request, as such this Industrial Dispute has been 
raised. It is the case of the union that by treating his year of birth as 938, Dilo Rabidas has been superannuated 
five years prior to his actual date of superannuation. Thereby he has suffered irreparable loss and damages. The 
workman died on |2.09.2002 during pendency of the Reference case and his legal heirs have been substituted. The 
union on behalf of the substituted legal representative of Dilo Rabidas urged that his actual year of birth is 943 and 
the Tribunal may be pleased to set aside the Notice of superannuation dated .!2.997, issued by the Manager of 
Ningah Colliery and hold that one of the dependent of the workman is entitled to employment as the workman died in 
harness in the year 2002 and the back wages of Dilo Rabidas for the period from 0.07.998 to 30.06.2003 be paid to 
the legal heirs of Dilo Rabidas. 


4. Management contested the Industrial Dispute by filing their written statement. According to the contents of their 
written statement, the date of birth of Dilo Rabidas was correctly recorded in the Form-B Register and as a token of 
acceptance of correctness the workman put had put his Left Thumb Impression in the Register (hereinafter referred to 
as LTI). In the year 985 a new Form-B Register was prepared and the date of birth was correctly recorded as 938 
which was also accepted by the workman by putting his LTI in the Register. In the Service Book of the workman his 
year of birth was recorded as 938, which was again accepted by the workman by putting his LTI without any 
objection. SRE containing service particulars were issued to the workman in |987, declaring his year of birth as 938 
but the workman did not raise any objection. It is denied that the year of birth was recorded as 943 in the Service 
Records of the company. The union in terms of their letter dated 28.07.996 raised dispute before the Assistant 
Labour Commissioner and the employer submitted their reply on 2!.03.997. It is urged that the union has not been 
able to make out their case at the time of conciliation to establish the foundation of the year of birth of the workman 
as such the Industrial Dispute is not tenable. The management denied that the superannuation of the workman was 
illegal and that the legal heirs are not entitled to any relief. 

5. Ram Kishun Das @ Abinash Goutam, son of Dilo Rabidas filed an affidavit-in-chief and was examined as 
Workman Witness - |. In the affidavit-in-chief it is stated that Dilo Rabidas was initially appointed at Ningah Colliery 
under Sripur Area of ECL and his year of birth was recorded as 943 in the Original and Statutory Form-B Register 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4829 


of Ningah Colliery and subsequently his father was transferred to Sripur Seam Incline under Sripur Area of ECL. 
Thereafter he was transferred back to Ningah Colliery, where he was illegally superannuated in a premature manner. 
It is averred that the year of birth of his father was rightly recorded in the Identity Card, issued by the erstwhile 
management. It is stated by the workman witness that in the Identity Card, issued by the Election Commission of 
India, the age of his father was recorded as fifty years as on 0!.0.!995, which is more or less the actual year of birth 
of his father. In the year 987 for the first time Dilo Rabidas learnt that his year of birth is wrongly recorded as 938 
in the Service Record and duplicate Form-B Register of the company and he raised a complaint in the Remarks 
column of the SRE and submitted the same before the management of Sripur Seam Incline. It is urged that the 
management of Sripur Seam Incline is in possession of the original SRE of the deceased employee. Though the 
workman raised dispute regarding his year of birth recorded in the duplicate Form-B Register, the management of the 
company did not arrange for his age determination by the Apex Medical Board. The management has wrongly and 
arbitrarily altered the year of birth of the employee as 938 in the duplicate Form-B Register without any foundation. 
Accordingly, the superannuation Notice dated .2.997 was issued to the workman by the management of Ningah 
Colliery be set aside and one of the dependent of the deceased employee be provided with employment and the legal 
heirs of Dilo Rabidas be paid full back wages and other consequential benefits, as if he had not been superannuated 
from service prior to 30.06.2003. The workman witness produced a copy of Identity Card of Dilo Rabidas as Exhibit 
W-, which is marked after objection. A copy of superannuation Notice dated .!2.997 has been produced as 
Exhibit W-2. 

6. Incourse of cross-examination witness denied the suggestion that the Identity Card produced as Exhibit W-! is a 
fabricated document or that it was not issued by the colliery authority. He also denied that the year of birth of his 
father is 938 and that he should have been superannuated considering his year of birth as 938. 

7. Mr. Ajit Kumar Mazumdar, Deputy Manager (Personnel), Ningah Colliery has been examined as Management 
Witness — |. In his affidavit-in-chief he has reiterated the case of the management by stating that the year of birth of 
Dilo Rabidas is recorded as 938 in the Service Book of the company and the same is reflected in the Service Record 
of the company. It is also stated that the workman superannuated from service on 30.06.998 on his attaining sixty 
years of age as per his date of birth entered in the Service Record. In the affidavit-in-chief it is stated that the year of 
birth recorded in the Identity Card of the ex-workman as |943 is not correct and in the statutory documents the year 
of birth of the workman was never recorded as 943. It is asserted that the Identity Card is not a statutory document 
for considering the age of superannuation and the Form-B Register and SRE are the documents which have to be 
relied upon for the purpose of superannuation of a person and the management committed no illegality by 
superannuating the workman from service. According to the management witness the ex-workman and his legal heirs 
are not entitled to any relief and the Industrial Dispute is liable to be dismissed. Management witness produced the 
following documents in course of his examination : 


(i) Copy of the Form-B Register of Ningah Colliery bearing name of Dilo Rabidas is produced as 
Exhibit M-| (after objection). 


(ii) Copy of the Service Book of Dilo Rabidas, prepared after nationalization, as Exhibit M-2. 


(iii) Copy of the Form-B Register of Sripur Seam Incline, bearing the name of Dilo Rabidas in which his 
year of birth is mentioned as 938 is produced as Exhibit M-3 (after objection). 


8... In course of cross-examination Management Witness stated that Exhibit M- was prepared in the year 985 and 
the basis of the entries made in the Form-B Register have not been recorded. The witness stated that he has produced 
document to establish that the SRE was served upon Dilo Rabidas. 


9. The point for consideration is whether the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas was wrongly recorded as 938 and what 
relief the workman is entitled to? 


0. Ms. Debarati Konar, learned advocate for the dependent of the deceased employee, Dilo Rabidas, argued that 
the date of birth of Dilo Rabidas was recorded as 943 in the original Form-B Register of Ningah Colliery. In his 
Identity Card the year of birth of the workman was recorded as !943 which has been marked as Exhibit ४४-] (after 
objection). It is submitted that Dilo Rabidas was thereafter transferred to Sripur Seam Incline and in the year 987. 
SRE was served upon him, when for the first time he came to know that his year of birth was wrongly recorded as 
938 in the duplicate Form-B Register of the company and he raised objection against such wrong recording of his 
year of birth. Learned advocate further argued that though the workman raised objection against wrong year of birth 
recorded in the duplicate B-Form Register, the employer company did not refer him for determination of his age by 
the Apex Medical Board. Notice of superannuation was issued on the basis of incorrect date of birth, bearing Ref. No. 
M/N/C-6/96/83/3738 dated .2.997, wherein the management of Ningah Colliery informed Dilo Rabidas that he 
would superannuate from service on and from 0.07.998, which has been produced as Exhibit W-2. It is argued that 
Dilo Rabidas was entitled to be in service upon 30.06.2003 but he was ultimately superannuated from service on 
0.07.998. After raising the Industrial Dispute, Dilo Rabidas died on 2.09.2002. Learned advocate argued that the 
order of superannuation is illegal and liable to be set aside and Dilo Rabidas who died in the meantime on 
2.09.2002, his legal heirs are entitled to money equivalent to the wage of Dilo Rabidas from 0!.07.998 to 


4830 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


2.09.2002. Learned advocate for the dependent of Dilo Rabidas inter-alia argued that the Identity Card of Dilo 
Rabidas issued by the management clearly states his year of birth as 943, on the other hand the management has 
failed to produce any document in support of their claim that the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas is 938. Learned 
advocate in support of her argument relied upon a decision of the Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad in the case of 
Shyam Lal Vs. Additional Commissioner and Others [C.M.W.P. No. 9257/980], wherein it was held that in the 
absence of any certificate, the date of birth recorded in his Service Book must be deemed to be his correct date of 
birth. Learned advocate for the dependent of the deceased employee also relied upon the decision of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court of India in the case of Gopal Krishnaji Ketkar Vs. Mohamed Haji Latif and Others [AIR 968 
SUPREME COURT 43], wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India held that a party in possession of best 
evidence which would throw light on the issue consciously withholds it, Court ought to draw an adverse inference 
against him notwithstanding that onus of proof does not lie on him and that party cannot rely on abstract doctrine of 
onus of proof or on the fact that he was not called upon to produce it. Learned advocate argued that in the instant case 
the management of the company had the original Form-B Register of Ningah Colliery of the year !963 in their 
custody in which the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas is recorded as 943 but they withheld such evidence and adverse 
inference should be drawn against them for non-production of original document and its place producing the duplicate 
Form-B Register which was subsequently prepared. 


ll. Mr. P. K. Das, learned advocate for the management of ECL argued that the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas was 
all through recorded in his Service Record as !938 and in the year !987 SRE was served upon him but the workman 
did not raise any objection. It is only after the Notice of superannuation was served upon the workman, disclosing his 
date of superannuation as 0.07.998 based upon his year of birth as 938, the workman raised the Industrial Dispute. 
It is argued that the document which has been produced on behalf of the dependents of the workman as the Identity 
Card of Dilo Rabidas does not bear any seal or signature of any issuing authority of ECL. The admission of document 
has been objected against and no evidentiary value can be attached to the same. It is argued that the year of birth was 
recorded as 938 in the Service Book, which has been marked as Exhibit M-2 and SRE was also issued to him in 
which the year of birth was recorded as 938. Learned advocate referred to the Form-B Register of Ningah Colliery 
and Sripur Seam Incline which have been produced as Exhibit -। and M-3 respectively where his year of birth has 
been consistently recorded as 938 which are statutory service record of the company lying with the management of 
the employer company. It is urged that the management has produced the statutory documents in their possession 
which demolishes the claim of the union. It is argued that the legal heirs of the workman have not been able to 
discharge their onus by producing any primary document in support of the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas, as such they 
are not entitled to any relief in this case. 


2. I have considered the rival contention of the legal heirs of Dilo Rabidas and management. The initial onus of 
proof lies upon the person who asserts a thing to be true. In the present case the union has raised the dispute that the 
year of birth of Dilo Rabidas was 943. The only document which has been produced at the time of evidence is 
Exhibit ४-।, which is purportedly an Identity Card of Dilo Rabidas. The document does not bear the name of the 
person as it has faded out over the years and the same does not bears any authentication from the office of the 
management and at the time of admitting the same in evidence the management raised objection. On the face of the 
document, it appears that it is incomplete in nature and I am unable to place reliance upon the same unless it is 
corroborated by some other evidence. No other document relating to year of birth of Dilo Rabidas has been 
produced on behalf of the legal heirs of the workman. The two other documents produced by the workman are the 
Notice of superannuation dated .2.l997 (Exhibit W-2) which disclosed the date of superannuation and termination 
of service of Dilo Rabidas as 0.07.998. The other document is a copy of death certificate (Exhibit W-3) discloses 
that Dilo Rabidas died on 2.09.2002. The management on the other hand produced a copy of service record of the 
superannuated employee as Exhibit M-2 where the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas is recorded as 938. No objection 
was raised on behalf of the workman at the time of admitting the document in evidence. The management witness 
stated that SRE was issued to the workman regarding his date of birth but he did not raise any objection. The Form-B 
registers of Ningah Colliery and Sripur Seam Incline have been marked as Exhibit -। and M-3 respectively after 
objection. In both these statutory documents the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas has been consistently recorded as 938. 
No evidence has been brought on record to establish that the workman on earlier occasion raised any objection 
regarding his year of birth recorded in the Form-B Register or against the Service Record wherein his year of birth is 
also recorded as 938. From Exhibit M-3, the Form-B Register of Sripur Seam Incline it appears the Dilo Rabidas 
was released for SSI to Ningah on 05.08.994. In the same Form-B Register there are entries in respect of two other 
persons. There is no interpolation in the year of birth recorded in the columns for Age and Sex of the person. Though 
objection has been raised against the copy of Form-B Register, I do not find such objection to be tenable in the light 
of the fact that the same is maintained in the official course, containing entries in relation to other employees as well. 


3. The decision of the Hon’ble High Court of Allahabad in the case of Shyam Lal Vs. Additional Commissioner 
and Others [C.M.W.P. No. 9257/980], relied on behalf the workman, I find the same goes against the workman as 
it has been observed that : 


“In the absence of any certificate of his having passed the High School or any equivalent examination at the time of 
his entry into the service, the date of birth or the age recorded in his service book must be deemed to be his correct 


[भाग II—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 483] 


date of birth for all purposes in relation to his service including eligibility for promotion, superannuation, premature 
retirement or retirement benefits.” 


In the present case the workman has not produced any Certificate. Therefore, the age of the workman recorded with 
the employer company shall have predominance over other claims. The workman at the fag end of his employment 
cannot be allowed to raise dispute with regard to the year of birth recorded by the employer to get additional benefit. 


4. In another decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Gopal Krishnaji Ketkar Vs. 
Mohamed Haji Latif and Others [AIR 968 SUPREME COURT 4]3], cited on behalf of the workman, the 
general principle regarding adverse presumption under Section |4(g) of the Indian Evidence Act of |872 wherein it 
is laid down that a party in possession of the best evidence which could throw light upon the issues in controversy, 
withholds the same from the court cannot rely upon abstract doctrine of onus of proof. In the instant case the primary 
onus relating to the proof of workman’s year of birth lies upon his legal heirs, which they have failed to discharge. 
The company is in possession of document containing year of birth of the workman recorded for several years and 
maintained as Service Record of the employee are produced as Exhibit M-l, M-2 and M-3. The entries found therein 
are consistent regarding the year of birth of Dilo Rabidas, which is [938, From the facts and evidence, I am unable to 
hold that the management has withheld the best evidence with them, available in this matter. 


5. Having considered the facts and circumstances and the evidence on record, I hold that Dilo Rabidas has 
been superannuated from his service w.e.f. 


0.07.998 on the basis of his year of birth recorded the Service Record lying with the company. The Industrial 
Dispute raised by the union on behalf of the workman and thereafter pursued by the legal heirs has no merit and the 
same is dismissed on contest. 


Hence, 
ORDERED 


that the Industrial Dispute is dismissed on contest. Let an Award be drawn up in light of my above findings. 
Let copies of the Award in duplicate be sent to the Ministry of Labour, Government of India, New Delhi for 
information and Notification. 


ANANDA KUMAR MUKHERJEE, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2048.-.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार भारतीय खाद्य निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता के पंचाट (संदर्भ संख्या 
04/2024) ot vat Ta करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 30/40/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं., एल -22043/04/2024-आई.आर. (सी.एम-ा)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2048.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 0/2024) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management Food 
Corporation of India and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 30070/2024. 


[No. L-2203/0I/2024 — IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


4832 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present : Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO. 0 OF 2024 
Parties : Employers in relation to the management of 
Food Corporation of India, Siliguri 
Versus 
The President, Food Corporation of India Shramik Union 
Appearance: 
On behalf of Food Corporation of India, Siliguri: Smt. Debjani Mitra, Ld. Advocate. 

On behalf of Food Corporation of India Shramik Union: Absent. 

Dated: 5™ July, 2024 

AWARD 


Ld. Counsel for the management of FCI is found present but none appears from the side of the union which 
has espoused the dispute under reference despite due service of notice upon it on |2-04-2024 as per the track report. 
Therefore, a presumption can be drawn that the union is no more interested to proceed with the dispute raised by it 
and as such it is not interested to pursue with the same. 


However, by order No. Kol-700020/0I/2024-Dy. CLC (C) dated 05-0-2024, the Dy. Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), Kolkata in exercise of power conferred under section |2 (5) read with sub-section (2A) of 
section l0 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 and in view of notification dt.l7-03-2023 u/s 3 (ii) has referred the 
following issue for determination to this Tribunal :- 


“Whether the action of the management (Food Corporation of India, Siliguri) is justified by way of deducting 
demurrage charges from all the DPS workers from their wages is legal and/or justified? If not, what relief the workers 
are entitled to?” 


Since there is nothing on the record to adjudicate the dispute or issue under reference and as such this 
Tribunal has no other option but to pass a No Dispute Award. 


Accordingly, Reference Case no. | of 2024 is disposed of. 
Justice K. D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer. 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 


का.आ. 2049.— औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार कोल इंडिया लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, कोलकाता के dae (संदर्भ 
संख्या 26/2004) को ya Tt करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 30/40/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 


[सं. एल -22042/334/2003-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2049.—In pursuance of Section l7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. No. 26/2004) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal- 
cum-Labour Court, Kolkata as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management Coal 
India Ltd, and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 30/70/2024. 


[No. L-2202/334/2003 — IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4833 


ANNEXURE 
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL AT KOLKATA 
Present: Justice K. D. Bhutia, Presiding Officer. 
REF. NO.26 OF 2004 
Parties: Employers in relation to the management of 
Coal India Limited 
AND 


Their Workmen 


Appearance : 

On behalf of Management: Mr. Uttam Kumar Mondal 
Ld. Advocate -Absent 

On behalf of the Workmen : Mr. Saibal Mukherjee, 


Advocate - Present 
Dated 6" February, 2023 
AWARD 
None appears on behalf of the parties when the matter is called 


Record shows on the previous date Ld. Counsel for the Union had put his appearance, but who had informed 
the tribunal, that he has not been given any authority by the Union to proceed with the case. 


Therefore, it can be informed that Union is no more interested to proceed with the case. 


The Management who was earlier represented by its counsel has not been taking any step for last two 
occasions to adduce evidence from its side. 


From such conduct of both the parties to the present proceeding it can be informed that parties are not 
interested to proceed with the case. 


Therefore, let me decide the present case on the basis of material on record. 


The Govt. of India on the strength of the power conferred by Sec. l0() (9) & (2A) of the I.D. Act, 947, has 
referred the following dispute for adjudication vide Ministry of Labour Letter No. L-2202/334/2003 (IRCM-II) 
dated 29.06.2004. 


“Whether the action of the management of Coal India Ltd. (HQ), Calcutta in denying promotion to Sh. Prasenjit 
Majumdar and Sh. Pijush Dasgupta is legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workmen are entitled?” 


Facts leading to the present Reference in gist is that the above two workmen named above were initially 
engaged by the Coal India Ltd. as casual worker on 6..8]. Their service was regularized on 6™ May 982 as 
Clerk Grade-III in terms of Order of the Hon’ble High Court. Both of them were subsequently promoted to Clerk 
Grade-II w.e.f 02..9]. 


They have been promoted or regularised as Clerk Grade III and as Jr. Technical Inspector Grade ‘D’ w.e.f. 
25.07.9 and as Asstt. Technical Inspector — Grade ‘C’ w.e.f 4.03.997 and lastly promoted as Technical Inspector 
Grade ’B’ w.e.f. 0.0.2002. 


Now, it is the case of the Union that there was a circular inviting application for the post of Jr. Technical 
Inspector-Grade D on 3 May, 989. In response to such Circular the workman Sri Pijust Dasgupta submitted formal 
application as early as on 26.l!.87 he had made an application seeking the posting of Technical Inspector as a Clerk 
Grade III and also on 26.06.88 as he had all qualification to be a Technical Inspector and which was also 
acknowledged by Regional Manager vide letter dated 05.0.88, but his application was never considered inspite of 
having five vacant posts. He again had made a fresh application for the said post on 27.03.89.Nevertheless, the 
Management vide letter dated 06.06.89 directed him to appear before the selection committee for interview / test on 
2.06.89. But no result was declared. However, he was promoted to the next post of LDC Grade II and he resumed 
the duty of L.D.C Grade IT on 02..89. 


All on a sudden a fresh circular inviting application for the post of Technical Inspector was published on 
4.02.9!. Accordingly, he submitted his application for the post on 4.02.9!. That Management vide Order dated 
25.07.9 intimated him that he was re-designated as Junior Technical Inspector ‘Gr. —D’ in the corresponding Scale 


4834 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


of pay of L.D. Clerk Grade-II and effective date would be the day he assumed charge at his new place of posting as 
Junior Technical Inspector ‘Gr. D’. 


He has alleged that he is entitled to get the benefit of post of Junior Technical Inspector ‘Gr. D’ from 
02..89 when he first appeared for interview the result of which was withheld by Management and thereby deprived 
him the financial benefits. His promotion to such post should be deemed from 02..89 and not from 25.07.9] the 
date of his actual promotion. 


He has also alleged the Sales Manager (Adm.) D. Banerjee in his note sheet dated 4/5.5.92 has mentioned 
that he and other two were discharging the duties of J.T.I although designation of L.D.C Grade II. But, Management 
did not consider such recommendation. He made a representation before the authority, but it was never considered. 


He has further alleged that Regional Sales Manager too in his note-sheet dated 2.09.994 had mentioned 
that Pijush Dasgupta and Prasenjit Mondal are/ were discharging the function of J.T.I since 02..89. But, Personnel 
Manager turndown the proposal that promotions are considered after gaining experience of minimum three years in 
the existing grade held both the recommended candidate not eligible for the post. 


It has been alleged that they were given promotion to Assistant Technical Inspector Group-C on 4.03.997, 
but their seniority was never counted from 02..89 and have alleged that they have been deprived seniority benefit 
and service benefits. 


Hence this reference ........ 


While the case of the Management is that Regional Sales Manager, West Bengal issued circular for the post 
of Jr. T.I. in Grade-D on 03.05.89 and later it was found as the same was not circulated to all Regional Sub Office and 
as such, the procedure adopted by R.S.M., WB being not proper no action was taken on all the procedure that took 
place and such circular. 


Accordingly, fresh circular was issued on |4.02.!99 inviting an application or selection to the post of Jr. 
व्‌, from amongst all eligible employees of all Regional Sales Offices and eligibility criteria for the said 


post was graduate in Science with Chemistry and permanent of employee of R.S.O at least for a year. 


On the recommendation of the Committee both the workmen were promoted to the post of Jr. T.I Group-D 
with effect from 25.07.99 and at the time of promotion they were wording as L.D.C Grade-II. 


Then both of them were further promoted to Assistant T.I. Grade-C w.e.f. 4.03.997 and Technical 
Inspector Grade-B w.e.f 0i.0.2002. 


In the span of 20 years both workmen were promoted from Casual to T.I. Grade-B and both of them are not 
eligible for the post of Senior Technical Inspector Grade-A. 


The workmen cannot claim promotion as a matter of right without fulfilling the required qualification and 
subject to vacancy. 


The promotion is guided by Cadre Scheme duly formulated by JBCCI represented by all regd. Five Trade 
Unions. They cannot claim promotion on the basis of recommendation made in the note-sheet and on their own 
representation. 


Therefore, without actual promotion the workmen cannot claim promotion on notional basis as per their own 
desire from 27.l0.89 and Jr. T.I. Grade-D and Asstt. T.I Grade-C w.e.f. 27.0.92 and T.I Grade-B w.e.f. 27.0.95. 
Therefore, it has prayed for dismissal of the Reference. 


The workmen to prove their claim have examined themselves as W.W. No.| and W.W. No. 2. They have 
filed as many as 54 documents and which have been exhibited. 


The Management too has examined Puspa Dey as M.W-| but whose cross examination was not completed 
and who has failed to appear before the Tribunal to face further cross examination after 24.02.6. From the side of the 
Management as many as 3 documents have been exhibited. 


From the facts discussed above it appears only question which requires determination in the present 
reference is whether a candidate who appeared in an interview and the result of which was never declared can claim 
himself to be qualified in such interview from the date of interview? 


The simple answer is “No”. 


A person who does not know whether he is qualified or disqualified in the interview cannot claim himself to 
be selected for the post (In the present case of promotional post) and cannot claim to have been selected for the post 
from the date of interview. 


It is true that the Authority who calls on interview for a post, it is the duty of the Authority to declare the 
result or declare the interview to be cancelled. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4835 


Exhibit M-3 dated 29.07.990 clearly shows that there was a circular for filling up of vacancies of Jr. 
Technical Inspector in Grade ‘D’ and such post was of Regional Sales Office Cadre and Circular was confined only to 
West Bengal Cell and it was not circulated in all Regional Sale Offices located throughout the country and as such, 
the Management appears to have decided to issue fresh circular for filling up such post. By circulating to all Regional 
Sales Offices of Coal India Ltd. spread throughout the country and on detection of such irregularity the Management 
had never published the result of interview dated 02.!.989. Accordingly, issued a fresh Circular dated 4.02.99] 
Ext. W. 23/Ext. M-6. 


Ext. M.4 the report of the selection Committee shows that both the workmen were qualified for the post of 
Jr. T.I. Grade ‘D’ along with Ashim Kumar Jana as all of them were in the post of Clerk Grade-II. 


It further shows that one A.K. Naidu, Clerk Grade-II of R.S.M., Bhopal had applied for the post who too was 
qualified for the post of Jr. T.I. Grade ‘D’. 


It further shows that there was no existing Post of Jr. T.I in Regional Sales Office and Regional Sales 
Manager, West Bengal Cell indicated that they will operate the post within the existing strength of Ministerial Cadre 
sanction of the Competent Authority is required, for operating the post of Jr. Technical Inspector against the post of 
Clerk Gr. II. 


Such remark further highlights that Management was under some pressure to create the post of Jr. Tech. 
Inspector Grade ‘D’ further the Clerical Grade-II Cadre. 


So, it appears that when the Management legally or illegally issued the circular for filling up the vacancy for 
the post of Junior Technical Inspector 


Grade ‘D’ in the Year 989, there was no post of such Junior Technical Inspector Grade ‘D’ and such Circular was 
circulated only within Regional Sub Office, Wet Bengal Cell and not to other Regional Sub Office located throughout 
the country. 


Prima facie the Circular of the 989 appears to be an illegal, consequently the interview held by he 
Management on the basis of irregular circular would become an illegal and irregular interview. 


That apart the concerned workmen who had qualification for the post cannot claim themselves to be 
qualified candidate without declaration of result and cannot claim or take benefit of such illegal interview. 


Moreso, the Tribunal is of view a person cannot claim benefit of a post/ promotional post until and unless he 
joins the promotional post. 


In the present case both the workmen had joined the post of Junior Technical Inspector Grade ‘D’ on the 
strength of Ext. M-8. The Office Order dated 25.07.99] and that too after qualifying in the selection process to fill 
up the vacancy as notified in the Circular dated 4.02.99]. 


So, it is not known how these two workmen could claim to have joined the promotional post (subject to 
qualification) in the Year 989, when they actually got promoted and joined the post only in the Year 99]. 


It is worth to mention here that the workman Pijush Das Gupta appears to be over ambitious as he had 
voluntarily sought himself to be promoted to the post of Jr. Technical Inspector Grade-‘D’ since the Year 987 as 
proved by Ext. १७. |, Ext. ४४.2, Ext. ४४.३ and Ext. W. I4. 


It is worth to mention here that no promotion can be given merely on recommendation without applying for 
the post and without fulfilling the prerequisite condition for promotion. 


In the present case, the workmen have based their claim for promotion not only on recommendation, but also 
by filing representation before the authority concerned. So, it appears the workman Pijust Das Gupta wanted himself 
promoted by hook or crook in other wards by any means. 


In view of the discussion made above, this tribunal find no merit in the reference. First and foremost, the 
concerned workmen were not denied promotion by the Management. 


It is admitted facts that both of them had joined the establishment of Coal India Ltd. as casual employee and 
whose service was regularised as per the order of the Court and they were regularized as Clerk Grade II. Later they 
were promoted to the post of Clerk Grade- II and while working as a Clerk Grade II, they on being selected were 
promoted to the post of Jr. Technical Inspector Grade —D. Then in the normal course, they were promoted to Asstt. 
Technical Inspector Grade ‘C’, and lastly, they were promoted as Technical Inspector Grade-‘B’, the last post to 
which they were eligible for promotion. 


Rather their demand for giving retrospective effect to their promotion to the post of Jr. Technical Inspector 
Grade ‘D’ from 02..989 appears to be illegal, when in reality they joined the promotional post of Jr. T.I Grade ‘D’ 


4836 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 
sometime in July, !99! and that too on the basis of circular dated February, 99] and passing the interview that took 
place thereafter. 
Accordingly, the Reference 26/2004 is hereby dismissed. An award is passed to that effect. 
Send copy of this Award to the Ministry for publication. 
Supply copy to the parties. 
Justice K.D. BHUTIA, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 2050.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार परमाणु ऊर्जा निगम के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान संख्या 
43/2007) को var tt करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 25/40/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 
[सं. एल -4202/209/2005-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)|] 
मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


S.O. 2050.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 43/2007) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
Nuclear Power Corporation and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 25//0/2024. 


[No. L-4202/209/2005 — IR (CM-ID] 
MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 


अनुलग्नक 
केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण एवं श्रम न्यायालय, जयपुर 
पीठासीन अधिकारी 
राधा मोहन चतुर्वेदी 
सी.जी.आई.टी. प्रकरण सं. 43 / 2007 
Reference. No. L-4202/209/2005-IR(CM-II) Dated:7.07.2007 
महासचिव, परमाणु विद्युत कर्मचारी यूनियन, रावतभाटा We यूनियन, कार्यालय फेज IL डाकघर भाभानगर, वाया 
कोटा- 323307 


ae प्रार्थी-यूनियन 
बनाम 
स्थल अधिशासी निदेशक, राजस्थान परमाणु बिजलीघर इकाई 4 से 4, पोस्ट- भाभानगर- 323307, वाया कोटा (राज.) 
का अप्रार्थी / विपक्षी 


उपस्थितः- 
प्रार्थी की ओर से: सुश्री सरिता चौधरी, एड. (श्री सुरेश कश्यप, अभिभाषक की ओर से)। 
अप्रार्थी की ओर से : धर्मन्द्र जैन, अभिभाषक | 
: अधिनिर्णय : 
दिनांक : 055082024 
4. श्रम एवं नियोजन मंत्रालय भारत सरकार नई दिल्‍ली द्वारा दिनांक 47.07.2007 को औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 
(जिसे आगे मात्र अधिनियम कहा जायेगा) की धारा 40 () (डी) एवं 2| के अन्तर्गत प्रदत्त शक्तियो के अनुसरण में 
निम्नाकित औद्योगिक विवाद न्यायनिर्णयन हेतु इस अधिकरण को संदर्भित किया गया :- 


“Whether the action of the management of Nuclear Power Corporation in not allowing 

277 Option to Shri G.P. Sharma for absorption in Nuclear Power Corporation resulting in denial of 
pro-rata pension is legal and justified? If not, to what relief the workman entitled?” 

7 प्रार्थी की ओर से दिनांक 49.04.2040 को दावे का अभिकथन प्रस्तुत करते हुये यह कहा गया कि श्री जी.पी. शर्मा, 

eer सी. राजस्थान परमाणु बिजली घर के अस्पताल में कार्यरत था। राजस्थान परमाणु बिजली घर वर्ष 4987 के 

पहले परमाणु उर्जा विभाग के अधीन था, उसके बाद न्यूक्लियर पावर स्टेशन को 4997 में न्यूक्लियर पावर कोर्पोरेशन 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4837 


ऑफ इंडिया बना दिया गया। वर्ष t904 में परमाणु उर्जा विभाग में कार्यरत कर्मचारियों को उक्त कोर्पोरेशन 4 
अन्तरलयन का अवसर दिया गया। श्री जी.पी. शर्मा, हेल्पर सी. ने सितम्बर, 4994 से NPCIL में ज्वाइन करने के 
लिये विकल्प पत्र भरा। विभाग द्वारा i994 में निकाले गये विकल्प पत्र में 770-#द्यांव Pension दिये जाने का 
प्रावधान नहीं था। किंतु विभाग द्वारा वर्ष 4998 में अन्तरलयन के लिये जो विकल्प पत्र दिया गया उसमें Pro-rata 
Pension दिये जाने का प्रावधान था। परमाणु उर्जा विभाग ने दिनांक 24.42.4997 को ज्ञापन पत्र जारी कर वर्ष 
4994 में जिन कर्मचारियों ने विकल्प पत्र भरा था उन्हें विकल्प बदलने का अवसर दिया गया। श्री जी.पी. शर्मा के 
विरूद्दर i998 में विभागीय जॉच चल रही थी इसलिए उन्हें विकल्प संशोधित करने का अवसर नहीं दिया गया और यह 
कहा गया कि vita कार्यवाही समाप्त होने पर यह अवसर दिया जायेगा। श्री जी.पी. शर्मा के foes जॉच कार्यवाही 
समाप्त हो जाने पर भी उन्हें अपना विकल्प जो अन्तरलयन के लिये था, बदलने का अवसर नहीं दिया गया। अतः 
विपक्षी की इस कार्यवाही को अवैध घोषित करते हुये वर्ष t9908 से श्री जी.पी. शर्मा को पुनः विकल्प देने के साथ 
Pro-rata Pension का लाभ दिलवाया जाये | 


2. दिनांक 30.05.2042 को विपक्षी द्वारा वादोत्तर प्रस्तुत करते हुये यह कहा गया कि श्री जी.पी. शर्मा की नियुक्ति दिनांक 
24.04.984 से अस्पताल में वार्ड वाय के पद पर की गई थी। श्री जी.पी. शर्मा को रेडबुक का आप्शन फार्म दिया गया 
था। उन्होंने दिनांक 4.09.:995 को NPCIL में ज्वाइन करने का विकल्प चुना साथ ही Pro-rata Pension एवं 
फेमिली पेंशन के बदले i00 प्रतिशत Commutation प्राप्त करने का विकल्प चुना था। श्री जी.पी. शर्मा के विरूद् 
विभागीय vita लम्बित थी जिसके उपरांत दिनांक 6.08.4999 के आदेश द्वारा उनकी वेतन वृद्धि 2 वर्ष के लिये संचयी 
प्रभाव से रोकी गई। तत्पश्चात श्री जी.पी. शर्मा को अपराधिक प्रकरण में तीन साल के कारावास से दण्डित किया गया 
और निलम्बित किया गया। तदुपरांत श्री जी.पी. शर्मा को विभागीय जॉच के बाद सेवा पृथक करने का दण्ड दिया 
गया। इसलिये उन्हें अपना विकल्प देने का कोई अधिकार नहीं था। इसलिए श्री जी.पी. शर्मा कोई अनुतोष पाने का 
अधिकारी नहीं है। 


3. दिनांक 08.04.20i5 को प्रार्थी की ओर से श्री गिर्राज प्रसाद शर्मा का साक्ष्य शपथ पत्र प्रस्तुत किया गया और यह 
प्रकरण प्रार्थी से प्रतिपरीक्षा के लिये नियत किया गया। तदुपरांत प्रार्थी पक्ष श्री गिर्राज प्रसाद शर्मा से प्रतिपरीक्षा 
करवाये जाने हेतु अवसर लेता रहा fg साक्षी को प्रतिपरीक्षा हेतु प्रस्तुत नहीं किया। इस प्रकार विगत 9 वर्ष से 
अधिक की अवधि में प्रार्थी पक्ष ने अपने साक्षी को अधिकरण के समक्ष विपक्षी द्वारा प्रतिपरीक्षा किये जाने हेतु प्रस्तुत ही 
नहीं किया। दिनांक 6.02.207 को प्रार्थी पक्ष को इस उदेश्य हेतु अंतिम अवसर भी दिया गया। इसके बाद दिनांक 
44.2.2024, 40.2.2023 व 30.04.2024 तक अंतिम अवसरों को न्यायहित में अग्रसरित किया जाता रहा, जबकि प्रार्थी 
पक्ष अनुपस्थित था। अंततः दिनांक 30.04.2024 को प्रार्थी की साक्ष्य समाप्त कर दी गई। विपक्षी द्वारा भी इस स्थिति 
में कोई साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत नहीं करना चाहा गया। 


4. इस विवाद में प्रार्थी ने लगभग 9 वर्ष से अधिक का समय और एकाधिक अवसर चेतावनी सहित दिये जाने पर भी 
स्वयं को प्रतिपरीक्षा हेतु प्रस्तुत नहीं किया। निष्कर्ष रूप में अपनी साक्ष्य प्रस्तुत ही नहीं की। प्रतिपरीक्षा के अभाव में 
मुख्य परीक्षा के कथन साक्ष्य में ग्रहण नहीं किये जा सकते। इस प्रकार प्रार्थी अपने साक्ष्य से दावे के अभिकथन में 
किये गये अभिवचनों को प्रमाणित नहीं कर सका है। साक्ष्य के अभाव में प्रार्थी विपक्षी से कोई अनुतोष प्राप्त करने का 
अधिकारी नहीं है। 


5. संदर्भित विवाद का इसी प्रकार न्‍्यायनिर्णयन किया जाता है। 


6. अधिनिर्णय की प्रतिलिपि औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 की धारा 47 (3) के अनुसरण में प्रकाशनार्थ प्रेषित की 
ured | 


7. न्यायालय द्वारा अधिनिर्णय आज दिनांक 05.08.2024 को सुनाया गया। 


राधामोहन चतुर्वेदी,पीठासीन अधिकारी 


नई दिल्‍ली, 30 अक्तूबर, 2024 
का.आ. 2054.—3heihie = विवाद अधिनियम, 4947 (947 का 4) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय 
सरकार एस.सी.सी.एल के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारों के बीच, अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद 


4838 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण - सह - श्रम न्यायालय, हैदराबाद के पंचाट (पहचान संख्या 
9/2042) को yor ta करती है, जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 29/40/2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था। 
[सं. एल -22043/0/2024-आई.आर. (सी.एम-)] 


मणिकंदन.एन, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 30th October, 2024 


9.0. 205.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (ID. No. 9/202) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal-cum- 
Labour Court, HYDERABAD as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the Management of 
S.C.C.Ltd. and their workmen, received by the Central Government on 29/70/2024. 

[No. L-2203/0/2024 — IR (CM-ID] 


MANIKANDAN. N, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


IN THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM LABOUR COURT AT 
HYDERABAD 


Present: - Sri Irfan Qamar 
Presiding Officer 
Dated the 6" day of October, 2024 
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE L.C.No. 9/202 
Between: 
Sri B. Seetharam, 
S/o Akkayya, 
R/o Flat २०.।02, H.No. 2-8-423, 
Flora Mansion Apartment, 
Narsinga Rao Lane Mettuguda, 
Secunderabad. हे ....Petitioner 
AND 
l. Chairman & Managing Director, 
M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Kothagudem, Khammam District. 
2. Director (P A & W) 
M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Kothagudem — 5070. Khammam District. 
3. Dy. General Manager (Personnel) 
M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Personnel Management Wing, 
Kothagudem — 507 0!. Khammam dist. 
4. Sri Hassan Abbas, 
S/o Sajjad Hussain, 
Dy. G.M. (Personnel), HRD, Corporate Office,(Rtd.,) 
M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Kothagudem — 507 0]. 
5. Chief Medical Officer, 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4839 


The Main Hospital of Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Kothagudem -5070I. 
6. Dr. J. Ramohan Rao 
Dy. Chief Medical Officer, 
Area Hospital of Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Ramakrishnapuram. Adilabad district. 
7. Sri Quthubuddin 
Vigilance Assistant (rtd.) 
C/o Vigilance Department, 
M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Corporate Office, Kothagudem 507 0]. 
8. Sri M.Z. Rehman 
Vigilance Officer at Corporate Office, 
Vigilance Department, 
M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
Corporate Office, Kothagudem 507 0]. 
9. Sri T. Rama Swamy 
Vigilance Assistant, 


M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 


Corporate Office, Kothagudem 507 0]. Les -Respondents 
Appearances: 
For the Petitioner : Party in Person 
For the Respondent: M/s.P.A.V.V.S. Sarma & Vijaya Lakshmi Panguluri, Advocates 
AWARD 


Sri 3. Seetharam who worked as Refractionist (who will be referred to as the workman) has filed this petition under 
Sec. 2A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, !947 against the Respondents M/s. Singareni Collieries Company Ltd., 
seeking for declaring the proceeding No.CRP/PER/IR/D/92-996 dated 6.!.20l0 wef. 0..20l0 issued by 
Respondent as illegal, arbitrary and to set aside the same consequently directing the Respondents to reinstate the 
Petitioner into service duly granting all the consequential benefits such as continuity of service, back wages and all 
other attendant benefits etc., and such other reliefs as this court may deems fit. 


2. The averments made in the petition in brief are as follows: 


It is submitted that the Petitioner joined in the Respondent Company as "Refractionist" in the Main Hospital of M/s. 
The Singareni Collieries Co. Ltd., Kothagudem, on 26.2.!992 which is his initial appointment and latter Petitioner 
was transferred to Area Hospital, Bellampally on 0.8.!998 and the Petitioner was discharging his duties to the 
satisfaction of his superiors from the date of initial appointment till the date and he is having unblemished service 
record of l8 years. It is submitted that Petitioner was unnecessarily implicated in a false case and conducted a make 
show enquiry and dismissed Petitioner from service. At the time of dismissal Petitioner was discharging duties as 
"Refractionist" Grade-"B" drawing a monthly gross salary of Rs. 25000/ approximately and take home salary was 
Rs.8,000/- P.M. It is submitted that Petitioner is a qualified "Optometrist" and was appointed in a permanent post as 
Refractionist in first Respondent company’s Main Hospital, Kothagudem i.e. Fifth Respondent and working since 
26.2.992 in the Respondent company hospitals and Petitioner had unblemished service of l8 years. It is submitted 
that at the time of joining in employment in first Respondent company hospital Petitioner was a bachelor and latter 
married Ms.Yamuna Rani on 23.2.!996 while in service. Smt. Yamuna Rani is a post graduate in Nutrition and 
dietitian and after marriage she studied “Optometrist" course at Sarojini Devi Eye Hospital, Hyderabad from 996 to 
998 and she completed her course in the year 998. It is submitted that as per the rules of the company Petitioner 
furnished the necessary information about his family particulars, wife's name, her educational qualifications and by 
that time Petitioners wife was a qualified "Optometrist". Further, Petitioner requested the first Respondent 
management to effect the necessary changes in various nomination forms and records and clearly declared his wife as 


4840 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


dependent on him. When working at Area Hospital Bellampally the Respondent management unnecessarily 
implicated Petitioner in a false case on the alleged ground that he was running a regular private eye clinic in the 
name and style of "Sambhavi Eye Hospital" in Bazar Area of Bellampally basing on some wrong information given 
by some persons. Even without enquiring from this Petitioner prima facie the second and third Respondents at the 
behest of sixth Respondent set in motion the Vigilance department claiming to be discreet enquiry through seventh to 
ninth Respondents herein. In fact the said eye clinic belongs to Petitioners wife who is a qualified Refractionist and 
she is carrying on her independent avocation. The Respondent management also alleged against Petitioner that he had 
not intimated the Management about his wife's educational/ qualifications and designation thus at the behest of sixth 
Respondent one Sri.M.Z. Rehaman claiming to be the Vigilance Officer arrayed as eighth Respondent along with two 
Vigilance Assistants Sri Quthubuddin and Sri T.Rama Swamy arrayed as seventh and ninth Respondents came along 
with them and have chosen shoot photographs through video of Petitioners wife discretely when she was coming to 
her clinic "Sambhavi Eye Hospital" this act was objected by the Petitioner and his wife. The seventh to ninth 
Respondents came to "Sambhavi Eye Hospital and were taking a Video on 2!-07-2004 at 9-00 PM and when enquired 
they informed that the first Respondent management officials asked them to do so and also alleged that they caught 
Petitioner red handed as though they found him in person at his wife's clinic and his wife was not treating the patients 
in the said eye clinic. It is submitted that first Respondent officials of the vigilance department i.e. seventh to ninth 
Respondents informed that at the instance sixth Respondent i..c Dr. J. Ram Mohan Rao the then acting as Dy. C.M.O 
they have followed the instructions, acted and all such actions are done in an illegal manner. Petitioner came to know 
during the proceeding of the domestic enquiry that the Dr. J. Ram Mohan Rao the sixth Respondent is the cause for 
alleged surveillance work and also for sending an anonymous letter to the management and based on the strength of 
these two acts vigilance enquiry was done on Petitioner and when Petitioner objected them these Respondents made 
false allegations stating that Petitioner assaulted the vigilance staff and others. In fact Petitioner objected when the 
alleged vigilance staff started taking photographs and videos of Petitioner's wife in the shop. Petitioner also gave a 
police complaint on 2[-07-2004 in this context. It seems the vigilances officials were implanted by the sixth 
Respondent for getting over their misdeeds Petitioner was falsely implicated under the company standing orders of 
25.37, 25.23 and 25.9 and initiated disciplinary action by issuing a charge sheet No. BPA/Med./F/003/3050 dated [7 
October, 2004. It is submitted that Petitioner submitted explanation to on 04-!0-2004 as per the knowledge of facts 
as on that date. Respondent officials conducted domestic enquiry for more than five years and then dismissed 
Petitioner from service vide Ref.No.CRP/PER/IR/D/92-996 dated 06--200 with effect from 0--200 without 
proper opportunity in departmental enquiry. Petitioner was made a scapegoat thus illegally terminated the services of 
the Petitioner by passing impugned dismissal order which is arbitrary. Then Petitioner preferred an appeal on I5-]- 
20] to the first Respondent and the same was not disposed till date. It is submitted the domestic enquiry conducted 
by the first Respondent is not based on principals of natural justice and full and fair opportunity was not given to 
Petitioner which is evident from the proceedings of the enquiry itself. It is respectfully submitted that the dismissal 
/termination order. Because of the illegal acts of the first Respondent officials taking videos and photographs upset 
Petitioners wife 's health and she was mentally harassed and abused for no reason and it affected her health totally and 
Petitioner also had undergone untold misery and spend quiet good amounts to get treated his wife with a psychiatrist 
and she has become normal now. The enquiry officer never allowed Petitioner to lead evidence properly in this 
context though Petitioner protested no appropriate steps were taken in this regard. In the mean time the Respondent 
management issued transfer order dated 22-07-200 transferring Petitioner to Bhupalpally and later issued second 
transfer order dated 05-08-200 to Area hospital, Ramakrishnapuram (RKP) SRP area asking this Petitioner to join 
by 7-08-200. Thus exercised illegal exercise of power by alleged transfer orders culminated finally into the present 
dismissal order which is bad in law and unsustainable in nature. To cover up several omission and commission of the 
erring officials the first Respondents officials submitted documents forging the Petitioners signatures and brought into 
existence certain documents and relied on them and thus adopted unheard procedure. These Respondents also violated 
the provisions of Section 9 A of the Industrial Disputes Act. |The domestic enquiry was prolonged nearly for a 
period of five years to humiliate the Petitioner and made him to suffer with mental agony. No legal action was taken 
against the erring officials basing on legal notices issued by the Petitioner and his wife on 4-8-2004 but took action 
against Petitioner basing on alleged anonymous letter which has not seen the light of the day and thus adopted 
discriminative attitude by the management of the first Respondent between erring officials and innocent employee. 
The Disciplinary Authority misconstrued the entire evidence and has chosen to come to an erroneous conclusion 
contrary to the record, and confirmed that Petitioner has taken a private business by running a private clinic in the 
name of"Sambhavi Kanti Davakhana". Hence, prayed to set aside the dismissal order Ref. No.CRP/PER/IRID/92- 
996 dated 06--200 with effect from l0..200 and reinstate the Petitioner with back wages. 


3. The Respondents filed counter denying the averments made in the petition, with the averments in brief 
which runs as follows: 


It is submitted that the Petitioner was appointed in the Company on 26.02.992 as Refractionist at Collieries Main 
Hospital, Kothagudem. He was transferred to Area Hospital, Bellampalli during August, 998, While working at 
Area Hospital, Bellampalli, he was served with a Charge-sheet No.BPAMED/F/003/ 3050, dated 0.0.2004 for 
misconduct under Company's Standing Orders No.25(37), 25(23) and 25(9) for running a regular private eye clinic 
in the name of "Sambhavi Kanti Davakana in Bazaar Area, Bellampalli under the guise that the said establishment 


[भाग ए--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 484] 


belongs to his wife and for directing the Company employees / patients from Area Hospital, Bellampalli to go to the 
said eye clinic for taking treatment and spectacles and also treating the patients by himself by charging fees. Further, 
on 2.07.2004 at about 9.00 p.m., when the officials of Vigilance Department Staff went to the Eye Clinic to enquire 
into the matter for running a private eye clinic and were trying to collect the evidences, he misbehaved with the 
Vigilance Department Staff and attempted to assault them. It is submitted that as the above act on his part has 
constituted misconduct under Company's Standing Orders, he was issued Charge Sheet dated 0.0.2004. The 
Petitioner submitted to the charge sheet which was found not satisfactory. Enquiry was ordered by appointing an 
enquiry officer and he conducted enquiry on various dates from |.2.2004 to 22.06.2009 by following the principles 
of natural justice by giving the charged employee full and fair Opportunity to defend his case including allowing a 
Defense Assistant to defend his case. The enquiry proceedings were also recorded in Telugu as demanded by the 
Petitioner. During the enquiry, the Petitioner has fully participated. As per the report of the Enquiry Officer and the 
following 02 charges leveled against him under Clause 25(37) and 25(9) under Company's Standing Orders were 
established. 


“25(37): Taking up employment with any other employer or carrying on any business or trade, without the 
permission of the Management. 


25(9): Assault, attempt to assault, threatening to assault, abuse, a co-worker or subordinate or superior while on duty 
or otherwise in connection with employment." 


It is submitted that the Petitioner was supplied copies of enquiry proceedings together with findings of the enquiry 
report vide letter dated 3.07.20l0 to enable him to make representation, if any, against the findings of the enquiry 
officer within 7 days of receipt of the letter. The Petitioner received the same and submitted representation dated 
27.08.20i0. The Disciplinary Authority after considering the domestic enquiry proceedings, representation submitted 
by the Petitioner has concurred with findings of the Enquiry Officer. Further, as there were no extenuating 
circumstances to take a lenient view it was decided to dismiss the Petitioner from service. Accordingly, the 
Petitioner was dismissed from service with effect from 0.!.20l0 vide order No.CRP/PER/IR/D/92/l996 dated 
06..200. It is submitted that the act of taking up private business of running a eye clinic was established in the 
enquiry based on the fact that charged employee was treating the patients in the "Sambhavi Kanti Davakana" when 
the Vigilance Department Staff went to eye hospital on 2!.07.2004 to enquire into the complaint, also examined the 
Vigilance Department Staff who approached him as patients. Further, his act of attacking Vigilance Staff who were 
deputed on official duty to enquire into the matter, was also established based on the statement of Vigilance 
Department Staff and this charge was also proved. The contention of the Petitioner that seventh to ninth Respondents 
informed that at the instance of Dr. J.;Ramamohan Rao, Dy.Chief Medical Officer, Area Hospital, Bellampalli, they 
have followed the instructions acted and all such actions in an illegal manner is denied. Dr.J.Ramamohan Rao, 
Dy.Chief Medical Officer is the disciplinary authority in respect of the Petitioner employee, who has served the 
Charge Sheet and also caused the conduct of enquiry. The contention of the Petitioner that his wife is a qualified 
Optometrist and having individual Eye Clinic at Bellampalli, which is her profession or avocation, and it has nothing 
to do with the Petitioner activities or job is not correct. The fact that being a regular employee of the Company, the 
Petitioner has taken up a private business and he was treating the patients in the "Sambhavi Eye Hospital" by himself 
even when his wife was also not available and which fact was established by the Vigilance Department when they 
have visited the "Sambhavi Kanti Davakana" on 2.07.204. It is, therefore, clearly established that the Petitioner 
only was running that private eye clinic. It is also submitted that the Petitioner has leveled certain allegations against 
the sixth Respondent in the affidavit, which are not connected to the charges leveled against the Petitioner which 
speaks that it is only an afterthought of the Petitioner to make allegations on the disciplinary authority for issuing him 
a Charge Sheet. It is submitted that the Petitioner was transferred to Bhupalpalli Area on administrative grounds 
during August 200, as there was no Ophthalmologist at Area Hospital, Bhupalpalli. Subsequently, the transfer 
order was modified and Petitioner was transferred to Area Hospital (Ramakrishnapur), Srirampur Area by cancelling 
his transfer effected to Bhupalpalli Area posting him to Srirampur Area was given keeping in view that 
Ophthalmologists are available at Main Hospital, Kothagudem Area Hospitals of Ramagundam and Srirampur and the 
services of refractionist are attached to these Ophthalmologist, whereas the services of Refractionist are not required 
at Area Hospital. Bhupalpalli. It is submitted that full and fair opportunity was given to the Petitioner during the 
course of domestic enquiry. The allegation that the domestic enquiry conducted by the 4" Respondent is not based on 
principles of natural justice and full and fair opportunity was not given is denied. _ It is true that the Petitioner vide 
letter dated 08-2-200! has informed/ declared his wife's qualification and her profession to the then Medical Supdt., 
Area Hospital, Bellampalli when the same were asked by the management. The enquiry was conducted on various 
dates from .2.2004 to 22.6.2009 and ran into 399 pages. The Enquiry Officer in his report has found the 
Petitioner guilty against only two charges which speaks of his unbiased and impartial attitude. The contention of the 
Petitioner that there is no approved transfer policy adopted by the Respondent Company is denied. _ It is submitted 
that Petitioner was transferred vide order dated 22.7.200 and later it was modified by another order dated 5.8.200. 
it is reiterated that in view of the settled law, the administrative transfer should not be interfered with and also that the 
enquiry against the Petitioner employee was conducted by following principles of natural justice by giving him full 
and fair opportunity to defend his case. Therefore, prayed to dismiss the petition. 


4842 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


4. The perusal of the record reveals that the domestic enquiry conducted by the Respondents in this case is held 
as legal and valid vide order dated 5.6.2023. 


5. Both parties has submitted their respective written arguments u/s llA of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947. 

6. On the basis of the pleadings of both parties and arguments advanced, the following points emerge for 
determination:- 

I. Whether the Departmental Enquiry conducted against the workman is legal and valid? 

Il. Whether the action of Respondent Management in terminating the services of the workman Sri B. Seetharam 


vide order dated 6..200 w.e.f. 0.I.200 is justified? 


Il. To what relief is the Petitioner entitled? 


Findings:- 
7. Point No.I: The legality and validity of the departmental enquiry has been held legal and valid vide 
order dated 5.6.2023. 


Thus, this Point is answered accordingly. 


8. Point No.II:- It can be gathered from the record that the Petitioner who was posted as a. Refractionist in the 
hospital of the Respondent Management was found guilty of committing misconduct under the Company’s Standing 
Order No.25.37 and 25.9 and the Disciplinary Authority after considering the enquiry report and submissions of the 
Workman has passed the order dated 6.!.20l0 whereby Petitioner has been dismissed w.e.f. 0..20l0 from 
service. Petitioner has challenged the said order of his dismissal on number of grounds taken in the claim statement, 
which we will deal in the succeeding paragraphs of this order. 


9. Firstly Petitioner has contended that domestic enquiry was not conducted as per principles of natural justice 
भाव the Petitioner was not permitted to adduce evidence in defence. Further, it is submitted that although Tribunal 
has held the enquiry as valid, but Petitioner reserved the right to question the validity of the said order if needed in 
future. 


0. Learned Counsel for Respondent urged that the validity of domestic enquiry has been held legal and valid 
vide order dated 5.6.2023 by the Tribunal and that order has not been challenged by the Petitioner before any forum 
within limitation period. Therefore, that order holding the departmental enquiry legal and valid has got the finality. 


Il. Since the departmental enquiry has been held legal and valid, vide order dated 5.6.2023 by the tribunal, that 
has not been challenged by the Petitioner before any higher forum therefore, it has got finality. Now, the Petitioner 
has no claim for reserving his right to Question the validity of domestic enquiry against the provision of Law. 
Hence, argument of the Petitioner is untenable. 


2. Secondly, Petitioner contended that the departmental enquiry against the Petitioner has been conducted by 
the Respondent management on the basis of anonymous letter/complaint. Whereas circular 
No. Vig./DPAW/KGM/200/438 dated 6 May 200] was circulated to all its CGMs/GMs/Chief/HODs, all Pits & 
Departments, Areas contains that anonymous/pseudonymous complaints not to be taken up for enquiries, as per 
instructions of Director (PA &W) and CEO. Therefore, the Enquiry in the present matter has been conducted in 
contravention of circular dated 6"" May, 200]. Further, it is contended that alleged complaints were Ingu Lakshman, 
General Mazdoor and Muthu Rangaiah, Coal Filler, Golati I Incline, Bellampally Area but they have not been 
examined as a witness by the Respondent. Therefore, the whole departmental enquiry as well as the impugned order 
be vitiated. 


3. On the other hand, Respondent Counsel contended that the disciplinary action was initiated against the 
delinquent Workman after receiving the complaint against him. Vigilance department staff investigated into 
complaint and conducted the raid on the eye Clinic “Shambhavi Kanti Dawakhana” of Petitioner on 5.2.2003 and 
on 2I* July 2004 respectively. During said vigilance staff witnessed and found that Petitioner was examining 
patients in the eye clinic and was giving the prescription to them on payment of fees for the same. While Petitioner 
was employed in the Area Hospital of the Respondent management, he was bound by the Company’s Standing Orders 
not to take any of the avocation without permission of Management. Moreover, vigilance personnel has been 
examined in support of charge as witness in the enquiry as ४७४] and MW2 and they have supported the charge in 
their evidence. Thus, finding has been given by Enquiry Officer on the basis of evidence on record. Petitioner 
was found guilty of charge for Private medical practice without obtaining the permission from the Respondent 
management and thereby he committed misconduct under the Standing Order No.25.37 of the company. 


4. In view of the submission made by the Petitioner as well as Respondent perused the record of enquiry 
proceeding. The record of enquiry proceeding reflects that on the basis of the complaint received against the 
Petitioner about his conduct of doing the private practice at his eye clinic without permission of the management, 
the Respondent management ordered to initiate Vigilance enquiry against Petitioner and the vigilance officials of the 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4843 


Respondent company visited the Petitioner’s hospital “Shambhavi Kanti Dawakhana” on 5/]2/2003 and 2.7.2004 
and they found that the Petitioner was examining the eye patients and was giving the prescription on payment of fees. 
However, Petitioner has taken the plea that his wife was running Eye Hospital in the name of Sambhavi Kanti 
Dawakhan and she was treating the patients as she has done course of optometry. But when vigilance Department 
officials Sri K. Qutubuddin, ५७४] and Sri T. Rama Swamy, MW2 of the Vigilance department of the Respondent 
company visited Shambhavi Kanti Dawakhana on 5.2.2003 and on 2I.7.2004, Petitioners wife wasn’t found there 
and Petitioner himself was examining the eye patients and was also taking the fees for treatment. Thus, the enquiry 
against Petitioner has been conducted on the basis of vigilance report and not merely on the basis of complaint. 
Therefore, the contention of the Petitioner that the departmental enquiry has been conducted against the Petitioner on 
anonymous complaint is not acceptable. Further, Petitioner has also challenged his dismissal order on the ground 
that vigilance staff of the Respondent company has acted with more overzealous and unbecoming manner against the 
Petitioner and it is alleged that they have fabricated the evidence against the Petitioner. However. Petitioner has not 
produced any cogent evidence to substantiate his allegation that the vigilance staff of the Respondent company was 
biased against the Petitioner in any manner. Therefore, making allegation of biasness without any evidence against 
the vigilance staff, is not sufficient to draw the inference that the disciplinary action against Petitioner has been taken 
by the Respondent in any prejudiced manner or in a biased manner. I found his argument without force. 


6. On going material on record, I am convinced there is ample evidence against the charge sheeted employee 
and he was caught red-handed running eye clinic in the name of Shambhavi Kanti Dawakhana under the guise that his 
wife was running the hospital. Further, it is also established for the evidence on record that Vigilance officials 
who visited eye clinic on I5.2.2003 and 2l* July 2004, found Petitioner treating the patient and taking fees and 
his wife was not found present there, on both the occasions when vigilance officials visited or conducted raid on the 
clinic. Presenting Officer Sri KBS Sagar who has deposed during the enquiry that on 5.2.2003 and 2.7.2004, 
vigilance team from SCCL visited at Shambhavi Kanti Dawakhana and it was found that the Petitioner, Sri B 
Seetharam was examining eye patient on payment of fees and his wife, was not present there. Further, Presenting 
Officer states that Sri. B Seetharam also caused hindrance in the work of investigation by the Vigilance staff and 
also intimidated them and prevented them from discharging their duties. Further Presenting Officer has also submitted 
documents MEX | to MEX II! in evidence which corroborate the testimony of the witnesses १/४७४] and MW2. 
Further, the record of enquiry proceeding also reveals that the Respondent management in support of the charge 
against the Petitioner has examined witness MWI Sri SK. Qutubuddin, Vigilance Assistant, who along with assistant 
has conducted raid at the eye clinic of the Petitioner and found Petitioner personally treating patients at the clinic and 
taking the fees. 


7. Thus, from evidence on record, it is established that Petitioner was running the Sambhavi Eye Clinic under 
the guise of his wife. | Further, this witness has deposed that on 2l“ July, 2004, the witness along with the staff 
conducted the raid along with staff, Sri K Devdas, T Ramaswamy, MZ Rahaman and G Rajesh, Driver from the 
vigilance department and during the raid and investigation, witness gathered information that the Petitioner Sri B 
Seetharam was present at the clinic and personally treating patients. His wife was not present and he was also 
collecting fees from patients. Further witness states that, Sri MZ Rahaman, from vigilance department, visited Sri B. 
Seetharam as a regular patient and B. Seetharam after giving the treatment gave him prescription slips. Further, Sri 
G. Rajaiah, the driver from Vigilance department also visited B Seetharam as a patient. While the witness started 
video recording of B. Seetharam at his clinic examining the patient, his assistant noticed and tumed off the clinic’s 
power. Thus, there is ample evidence on record that Sri B Seetharam was caught red-handed by the officials of 
vigilance staff at eye clinic. Further, witness states that Sri B. Seetharam also verbally abused the staff of vigilance 
Department and thereafter he left the clinic. He also threatened to file police complaint against the witness. Thus, 
this witness has also given the evidence supporting the charges against the Petitioner. 


8. Moreover, MW2 Sri T. Ramaswamy, Vigilance Assistant has also given the evidence in support of the 
charge. The record of the enquiry proceeding reveals that petitioner was accorded fair opportunity to produce 
evidence in defence and he has examined himself in defence and also produced the documentary evidence. Although 
the management witnesses has been cross examined by charge sheeted employee at length, but nothing has been 
elicited in the cross examination of these witnesses to make their statement unbelievable or unworthy of evidence. 
Although Petitioner has taken the plea that he was not running the eye hospital and treating the patients in the clinic 
but his wife who was having the certificate of optometry was running the eye clinic and was treating the patients. 
Further, he has submitted that he used to accompany his wife to drop her on clinic and also to take home back from 
clinic in the evening. Therefore, he was present at the clinic and it can not be presumed that he was running the eye 
clinic. | On perusal of the record, I am not convinced with the plea taken by the Petitioner as on both occasions of 
investigation/raid by the vigilance staff at the Petitioner’s eye clinic his wife was not found there, attending the 
patients, instead, Petitioner himself was found treating the patients and charging the fees. _‘It is unfathomable 
thatwhile Petitioner was extended the fair opportunity of adducing the evidence in defence but he did not dare to 
examine his wife or his Assistant present at the eye clinic in defence to establish his plea that he was not running the 
eye clinic, instead his wife was running the clinic and treating the patients. Therefore, I am constrained to draw the 
conclusion that plea taken by the Petitioner is of feeble nature and untenable. Hence, on going through the record of 


4844 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


enquiry proceeding, I am of the firm conviction that there is ample evidence against the petitioner in support of 
charge under Standing Order No.25.37 and 25.9 of the company. 


9. As regards the admissibility of the evidence in the case of domestic enquiry is concerned, it is settled law 
that once the domestic enquiry is held valid, therefore, the strict rule of Evidence Act is not applicable to such 
domestic enquiry. 


In this context, reference of the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of State of Haryana and 
Anr.,vs Rattan Singh , 977 SCC 49, is relevant, wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court have held: - 


“4. It is well settled that in a domestic Enquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence under the Indian 
Evidence Act may not apply. All materials which are logically probative for a prudent mind are permissible. There is 
no allergy to hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility. It is true that departmental 
authorities and administrative tribunals must be careful in evaluating such material and should not glibly. Swallow 
and what is, strictly speaking, not relevant under the Indian Evidence Act” 


Further, it is held, “The simple point is, was there some evidence or was there no evidence not in the sense of the 
technical rules governing regular court proceedings but in a fair common-sense way as men of understanding and 
wordly wisdom will accept. Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal 
is beyond scrutiny. Absence of any evidence in support of a ending is certainty available for the court to look into 
because it amounts to an error of law apparent on the record.” 


In view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as discussed above in the instant case it is not a 
case of no evidence and there is ample evidence in form of oral as well as documentary and also electronic evidence 
of CD of videography in support of charges framed against Petitioner. Therefore, it can be safely concluded that 
Petitioner has been rightly held guilty in the domestic enquiry on the charges of misconduct, under Standing Order 
Nos.25.37 and 25.9 of Company on the basis of evidence on record. 


20. Petitioner submitted that punishment imposed by way of termination of the Petitioner from service by 
Respondent No.| and 2 is shockingly disproportionate to the alleged misconduct as the charges are not proved against 
the Petitioner and he is having a family to maintain and his Wife has suffered mental agony ill-health. Further, it is 
submitted that Petitioner’s family is dependent on him and he is the only breadwinner and has suffered irreparable 
loss. Therefore, prayed for taking lenient view in imposition of punishment of dismissal. 


2i. As far as jurisdiction of interference in the order of punishment imposed by Disciplinary Authority is 
concerned, Hon’ble Apex Court has laid down principles in number of decisions extracted as below:- 


In Bikaner & Jaipur Vs. Nemi Chand Nalwaya in Civil Appeal ४०.5४6।/2007 dated .3.200 the Hon’ble Apex 
Court have held:- 


“6. It is now well settled that the courts will not act as an appellate court and reassess the evidence led in the 
domestic Enquiry, nor interfere on the ground that another view is possible on the material on record. If the Enquiry 
has been fairly and properly held and the findings are based on evidence, the question of adequacy of the evidence or 
the reliable nature of the evidence will not be grounds for interfering with the findings in departmental enquiries. 
Therefore, courts will not interfere with findings of fact recorded in departmental enquiries, except where such 
findings are based on no evidence or where they are clearly perverse. The test to find out perversity is to see whether 
a tribunal acting reasonably could have arrived at such conclusion or finding, on the material on record. Courts will 
however interfere with the findings in disciplinary matters, if principles of natural justice or statutory regulations 
have been violated or if the order is found to be arbitrary, capricious, mala fide or based on extraneous 
considerations.” 


In State of U.P. vs. Sheo Shanker Lal Srivastava and Others [(2006) 3 SCC 276], Hon’ble Apex Court have 
held:- 


“the Industrial Courts or the High Courts would not normally interfere with the quantum of punishment imposed 
upon by the Respondent stating: "It is now well-settled that principles of law that the High Court or the Tribunal in 
exercise of its power of judicial review would not normally interfere with the quantum of punishment. Doctrine of 
proportionality can be invoked only under certain situations. It is now well-settled that the High Court shall be very 
slow in interfering with the quantum of punishment unless it is found to be shocking to one's conscience." 


In the case of Maharashtra State Road Transport Corporation Vs. Dilip Uttam Jayabhay, the 2022 LLR page 
26, wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court held: 


“once the enquiry finding is held to be fair and proper, industrial Tribunal or Labour Court lacks jurisdiction to 
interfere with the quantum of punishment unless the same is shockingly disproportionate to the gravity of conduct.” 


Similarly, in the instant matter, the enquiry has been conducted by following principles of natural justice against the 
Petitioner and findings of the Enquiry Officer are based on evidence, the question of adequacy of the evidence will 
not be ground for interference in the findings of the domestic enquiry. It is not the case of “ no evidence” on record 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4845 


in support of charge or finding of the Enquiry Officer is perverse. In the instant case principles of natural justice has 
been followed by Enquiry Officer and no violation of statutory regulation has been pointed out by the Petitioner. 
The rule of preponderance is applicable to prove charge against delinquent employee in Departmental Enquiry. 
Therefore, the plea of the Petitioner that there is no ample evidence against him in support of charge in this matter 
is not tenable. Thus, I find no occasion to interfere in the impugned order of Disciplinary Authority of imposition 
of punishment of dismissal to Petitioner from service. 


22. Therefore, I found no force in the argument advanced by the Petitioner. Thus, in view of fore gone 
discussion, I am constrained to hold that the action of the Management in terminating the services of the Petitioner 
vide order dated 6..200 is justified. 


This point is answered accordingly against the Petitioner and in favour of the management. 


23. Point No. III: In view of the fore gone discussion and finding at Point No.I and II, the Petitioner is not 
entitled for any relief and his petition is liable to be dismissed as unfounded and devoid of merits. 


Thus, Point No. वा is answered accordingly. 
AWARD 


In view of the fore gone discussion and finding at Points No. I & II, I am of the considered view that the 
action of the Respondent in terminating the services of the Petitioner Sri B. Seetharam vide order dated 6..200 
with effect from 0..200 is held justified. | Hence, the Petitioner is not entitled to any relief as prayed for. As 
such, the petition filed by is devoid of merits, hence, liable to be dismissed. Therefore, the petition stands dismissed. 


Award is passed accordingly. Transmit. 


Dictated to Smt. P. Phani Gowri, Personal Assistant, transcribed by her, corrected and signed by me on this 
the 6" day of October, 2024. 


IRFAN QAMAR, Presiding Officer 


Appendix of evidence 


Witnesses examined for the Witnesses examined for the 
Petitioner Respondent 
NIL NIL 


Documents marked for the Petitioner 
NIL 
Documents marked for the Respondent 


NIL 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 नवम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 2052.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का t4:) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
यूनियन बैंक ऑफ इंडिया के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद 
में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय नं I दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (72/2020) प्रका ta करती है। 
[सं. एल - 39025/0/2024- आई आर (a-II)-40] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 4th November, 2024 
S.O. 2052.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.72/2020) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court No. - I 
Delhi_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Union Bank of India_ and 
their workmen. 


[No. L-39025/0/2024- IR (B-II)-40] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 


4846 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL CUM —- LABOUR COURT NO. I, NEW 
DELHI 


I.D. No. 72/2020 


Sh. Shyoraj Sharma Vs. Union Bank 
Counsels: 


For Applicant/ Claimant: 
Sh. Anurag Sharma, Ld. AR. 
For Management/ Respondent: 
Sh. RajatArora, Ld. AR. 
AWARD 


Appropriate Government vide reference no. ND.96(40)209-ID-FOC-DY.CLC has sent the reference to this 
tribunal in the following terms: 


“Whether the services of Sh. Shyoraj Sharma S/o Sh. K.P. Sharma have been terminated 
illegally and/or unjustifiable by the Union Bank of India, and If so, to what relief is he 
entitled and what directions are necessary in this respect. 


In pursuance of the above said reference, the claimant had appeared and filed the claim. claimant in his 
statement averred that he has been working at the post of helper with the respondent since !7.04.202 at salary of Rs. 
2,000/- per month. He did his work with sincerity and honesty. His job profile was to take files and documents from 
one table to another, bringing water to staff and cleaning. Management has not provided any legal facilities since 
beginning i.e. appointment letter, attendance register, casual leaves, yearly leave etc. He as usual was present on 
.03.20i8 for resuming his duty but hisservices were terminated illegally by management without assigning any 
reason. He had sent the demand letter through registered post on 20.03.20I8 but management did not reply. He 
submits that he is entitled for reinstatement with full back wages. 


2: Respondent had appeared and filed the written statement. He had taken the preliminary objection that there 
was no employer-employee relationship between the claimant and the management; question of termination doesn’t 
arise. No proof such as appointment letter, identity card, proof of payment of salary, termination letter etc. has been 
placed on record. He submits that the bank is required to follow the provision of article l4 and |6 of constitution of 
India in the matter of recruitment of the employees into the bank services and recruitment rules have been framed 
keeping in view of the constitutional mandate; claimant sought backdoor entry. The respondent has denied each and 
every averment made by the claimant. 


3. The claimant had filed the rejoinder denying the objection taken by the management in the written statement 
and affirmed the averment made by him in the claim statement. 


4. After completion of the pleadings, following issues were framed: 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 


2. Whether there exist employer and employee relationship between the management bank and 
the claimant. 


3. Whether the claimant’s service was terminated illegally, if so to what relief the claimant is 
entitled to. 


5. Claimant in order to prove his case, had examined himself and come into witness box. He has reiterated the 
averment in his affidavit as mentioned in the claim statement. He has relied upon the following documents i.e. 
Demand notice, registry receipts, the copy of claim statement filed before the conciliation officer and copy of his pass- 
book. Claimant was cross-examined by the management where he stated that he was called by Sh. Vinod Sharma, 
manager of the bank. He had gone to the bank for opening his account in June or July 20I, on being asked by Branch 
Manager, he told that he was unemployed, phone numbers had been exchanged. He admitted that he had not been 
given any appointment letter. He was aware about the appointment process of the bank but he had been told that till he 
was in the bank, he will remain there. No advertisement had been issued by the bank. His age was 42 years at the time 
of his alleged appointment. He admitted that no entry of amount of Rs. [2,000/- was reflected in the copy of the pass- 
book produced by him. 


6. rebuttal, respondent had examined one Dinesh Purbey. He also reiterated the averment made in the written 
statement/reply. He relied upon the two documents i.e. copy of the offer letter issued to an employee in the 


[भाग ए--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4847 


subordinate cadre as mark A and specimen copy of the recruitment notification as mark B. Nothing substantial has 
been asked from the witness. 


7. Counsel of the claimant had forcedly argued that there is enough entry of receiving cash in his pass-book 
from the site of management therefore he is able to establish the relationship of employee and employer between him 
and the management. He further said that management had not replied of his demand notice sent through registered 
post courier and the conciliation had been failed there. 


8. Per contra, counsel for respondent Sh. RajatArora has forcedly argued that none of the documents filed or 
produced by the workman has established any relationship of employee and employer between the claimant and the 
management. Further he argued that there is a rule and regulation of appointment as mandated by the constitution of 
India. The management relied upon the two documents i.e. copy of the offer letter issued to an employee in the 
subordinate cadre and specimen copy of the recruitment notification. He submitted that in absence of any evidence 
produced by the claimant, no relationship of employee and employer exists. Moreover, claimant himself admitted that 
he had been engaged by Sh. Vinod Sharma who had no authority to appoint him. Even there is no entry of Rs. 
2,000/- reflected in claimant’s pass-book indicating that he had been appointed at the salary of Rs. 2,000/- per 
month as asserted by him. 
9. In the light of above said evidence and argument discussed above, my findings on the issue are as follows: 

Issue no. | and 2 have the bearing upon each other. If the management is able to prove that there is no 
relationship of employee and employer between claimant and him, naturally, the claim is not maintainable. Section 
2(s) defines the workman. It reads as under: 


2 [(s) “workman” means any person (including an apprentice) employed in any industry to do any 
manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or 
reward, whether the terms of employment be express or implied, and for the purposes of any 
proceeding under this Act in relation to an industrial dispute, includes any such person who 
has been dismissed, discharged or retrenched in connection with, or as a consequence of, that 
dispute, or whose dismissal, discharge or retrenchment has led to that dispute, but does not 
include any such person— 


(i) who is subject to the Air Force Act, /950 (45 of 7950), or the Army Act, 7950 (46 of 7950), or 
the Navy Act, 7957 (62 of 7957), or 


(ii) who is employed in the police service or as an officer or other employee of a prison; or 


(iii) who is employed mainly in a managerial or administrative capacity; or (iv) who, being employed 
in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding 3 [ten thousand rupees] per mensem or 
exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office or by reason of the powers 
vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature. ] 


0. Now the workman claims that he is employed with the management, however, he is not able to produce any 
oral or documentary evidence suggesting that he had ever been employed by the management as a helper. He is not in 
possession of any appointment letter, termination letter, leave record etc. nor had he asked for these from the 
management. These documents are basically required to prove the relationship of employee and employer. However, 
in the absence of these documents, the workman can prove by direct or indirect evidence that he had been employed 
with the respondent but he has not produced any evidence herein so far from any person to prove that he had been 
seen there as an employee working with the management. Reflecting entry of some payment in cash in the pass-book 
does not create any relationship of employee and employer between them. 
ORDER 

In view of the above discussion, the claimant has failed to prove that he has ever been employed with the 
bank. Thereof, the proceeding is not maintainable, claim of the claimant is dismissed, award is accordingly passed. 
Copy of this award be sent to the appropriate government for notification U/S 7 of the LD Act. File is consigned to 
record room. 


Dated : 25.07.2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 4 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2053.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (:947 का 44+) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
राष्ट्रीय स्वास्थ्य एवं परिवार कल्याण संस्थान, THATS 2 सी सुरक्षा एवं सुविधाएं प्रालिमिटेड .गुड ईयर सुरक्षा 


4848 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


सेवा के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार 

औद्योगिक अधिकरण / श्रम न्यायालय नं वा दिल्‍ली के पंचाट (20/2020, 23/2020) प्रका ta करती है। 
[सं. एल - 2025/0/2024- आई आर (बी-)-232] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 

New Delhi, the 4th November, 2024 

S.O. 2053.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.l20/2020, 23/2020 ) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour 
Court No. - Wl_Delhi_as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of _National 


Institue of health & Family Welfare, MI2C Securtiy & facilities Pvt. Ltd, Good Year Secrurity Service and their 
workmen. 


[No. L-2025/0/2024- IR (B-I)-232] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
L.D. No. 20/2020 
Sh. Diganta Rabbha, S/o Sh. Pradip Rabbha, 
C/o- All India Central PWD (MRM) Karamchari Sangathan, 
House No-4823, Gali No. l3, Balbir Nagar Extension, 
Shahadra, Delhi-0032. 
LD. No. 23/2020 
Sh. Rajesh Kumar Jha, S/o Sh. Valmiki Jha, 
C/o- All India Central PWD (MRM) Karamchari Sangathan, 
House No-4823, Gali No. l3, Balbir Nagar Extension, 
Shahadra, Delhi-!0032. 


Versus 
l. The Director, 


National Institue of Health & Family Welfare, 

Baba Gangnath Marg, Munirka, New Delhi-!0087. 
2; MIC Security & Facilities Pvt. Ltd. 

8/40, UGF, South Patel Nagar, New Delhi-!0008. 
3. Good Year Security Services, 

A-75, UGF, Sector-08, Dwarka, New Delhi-0077. 


AWARD 

By this composite order, I shall dispose of these two applications of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act 
(here in after referred as an Act) filed by the different claimants against the same respondents, because of having the 
common respondents and same cause of action, these cases are taken together for their illegal termination. Claims of 
the workmen are that they were appointed by the management as Security Guard through contractor w.e.f. 04.07.202 
and 5.09.20I5 respectively. Management no.-! awarded the contract to management-2 for providing the Security 
Guards and Supervisors for the period 0.08.204 to 3.07.20I5 which were renewed from time to time. After proper 
scrutiny of the contract, management-! has again awarded the contract management-3 i.e. M/s Good Year Security 
Services, but this fact was concealed from workmen. Management-3 have been taken over the work from 
management-2 w.e.f. 6.06.20i9 but this fact was also not apprised to the workmen to engage in this matter and the 
workmen were refused to take on duty by management-3. Workmen have made complaint before the Hon’ble 
Regional Labour Commissioner (C), New Delhi for redressal of their grievances i.e. reinstatement of their services in 
respective places. Hon’ble RLC (C) implead the party as management-3 i.e. M/s Good Year Security Services. During 
the pendency of the case, management-2 issued the transfer order on 20.07.20l9 to the workmen for joining their 
duties in Jaipur so that workmen will not be able to arrange the bread and butter of their families and will 
surrender/resign from their respective duties which is illegal and comes under the definition of unfair labour practice. 
On 20.2.209, Hon’ble RLC (C) issued the direction to the above management for making the payment to the 
workmen as per law. On the same date Hon’ble authority also recorded the same in the proceeding and accepted that 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4849 


the above act of the management is just an exercise to escape from payment of legal dues to the workmen i.e. Notice, 
Notice Pay, Retrenchment compensation, gratuity, Bonus and leave encashment etc. Management-! gave the reply of 
the proceedings and denied the facts of the proceedings but, management-2 & 3 never replied the same. Hence, they 
have filed the present claim with the prayer to reinstate them with full back wages. 


W.S has been filed by the respondent-l & 2. Management-3 has been proceeded ex-parte vide order dated 
25.0.202l. Managements had denied the averment made in their claims. They had submitted that workmen’s claims 
are totally baseless and meritless having no locus stands. Their claims are liable to be dismissed. 


After completion of the pleadings, following issues have been framed vide order dated 22.02.2023 i.e.- 
l. Whether the proceedings is maintainable. 

Whether there exist employer and employee relations between RI and claimants. 

Whether the services of the workmen were illegally terminated by management-2 ? 


To what relief the claimants are entitled to and from which date? 


SAY» oP Seem ASD 


The benefits if permissible who would be liable to grant the same? 


Now, the matters are listed for workman evidence. On behalf of management-2, Ms. Komalpreet Kaur, AR 
appeared. Claimant AR Sh. Sunil Dutt has submitted that claimant Sh. Rajesh Kumar Jha has been taken back on duty 
by management-! through another contractor. He does not want to pursue the case. Claimant Sh. Diganta Rabbha 
cannot come to Delhi as he is residing in Assam so he wants to withdraw the claim. 


Considering the above submission on record, I.D No. 23/2020 stands dismissed because of the fact that the 
claimant has been taken back on job by managmenet-! through another contractor as stated by claimant AR. So far so, 
ILD. No. 20/2020 is concerned, it also stands dismissed, considering the fact that he does not want to pursue the case 
further because of his difficulty in coming to Delhi. Awards are passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the 
appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 of the ID act 947. Files are consigned to record 
room. 


Date- 08.08.2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 5 नवम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 2054.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम 4947 (4947 का t4:) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
सिंडिकेट बैंक के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक विवाद में औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय पटना के पंचाट ( 2(C) of 202]) vert tt करती है। 
[सं. एल - 39025/0/2024- आई आर (4-Il)-4] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 5th November, 2024 


S.O. 2054.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref. l2 ( ९) of 202] ) of the.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court Patna as 
shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of Syndicate Bank their workmen. 


[No. L-39025/0/2024- IR (B-II)-4] 


SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


Before The Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal, Patna. 


Reference Case No.:- 2 (C) of 202 


Between the management of (l) Regional Manager, Syndicate Bank, Regional Office, Maurya Lok 
Complex, Patna-80000I (2) Branch Manager, Syndicate Bank, Danapur Cantonment Branch, Danapur, Patna-80503 
And their workman Sri Kanhai Kumar Singh, H. No. 74 Krishna Bhawan, Patna Montessori School Lane, Gandhi 
Nagar, Boring Road, Patna-80000I. 


For the management:- Sri Rajan Ghoshrave, Advocate. 


For the workman:- Sri B. Prasad, President, Bank Employees Federation, Bihar. 


4850 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Present:- Manoj Shankar 
Presiding Officer, 
Industrial Tribunal, Patna. 
AWARD 


Patna, dt-_2'" September, 2024. 


By the adjudication order no.- I/ID(8)/202l/Dy CLC-Pt dated- 43/4.07.202] the Govt. of India, Ministry of 
Labour & Employment, Office of the Dy. Chief Labour Commissioner ( Central ), Maurya Lok Complex, A Block, 
2™ Floor, Room No.-6,6,& 7, Patna-80000] has referred under clause (d) of sub-section-(l) of Section-l0 of the 
Industrial Dispute Act, 947, ( hereinafter to be referred to as “the Act”), the following dispute between the 
management of the (l) Regional Manager, Syndicate Bank, Regional Office, Maurya Lok Complex, Patna-80000I 
(2) Branch Manager, Syndicate Bank, Danapur Cantonment Branch, Danapur, Patna-80!503 And their workman Sri 
Kanhai Kumar Singh, H. No. 74 Krishna Bhawan, Patna Montessori School Lane, Gandhi Nagar, Boring Road, 
Patna-80000 for adjudication to this tribunal:- 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of Canara Bank ( before amalgamation the then Syndicate Bank), 
Patna Bihar, in removing the services of Shri Kanhai Kumar Singh, Temporary Attender, w.e.f. l9.02.2020 is just & 
proper? , if not, to what relief the workman concerned is entitled to?” 


2s Briefly stated the claim of the workman Sri Kanhai Kumar Singh ( Workman ) is that he was orally 
appointed to discharge the duties of an attender ( Subordinate Cadre ) at the Danapur Cantonment Branch of the then 
Syndicate Bank now called Canara Bank after merger w.e.f. 7.06.209 discharged the duty like opening and closing 
of the Bank’s gate, opening of ATM Room. He also discharged the duties of putting registers, documents at the 
counter and table of the staffs if and when required. He also used to take out cash from the strong room and the same 
he placed at cash counter. It is further alleged that he also did the duties of stitching of currency note and vouchers. 
Some time he also performed the duties of mails to post office and delivery of Bank’s documents. The workman also 
discharged the duties of the clearing cheques coming to the main branch and some times brought stationary from the 
stationary pool to his branch at the instruction of then branch manager. It is also asserted that the workman used to 
discharge his duties right from 9.30 A.M to 5.30 P.M and some times even beyond that till closure of the branch. It is 
further asserted that the workman used to be paid pro-rata of a permanent attender which was @ Rs. 560/- per day 
and the amount was credited to his Saving Bank A/C No.- 740520i003770! and 740520i00380I3. It is further 
asserted that when the workman went to perform his duties in the morning of l9.02.2020 as usual he was stopped 
doing any duty of the bank. It is further asserted that after termination, workman approached the management at 
branch level and regional level for continuation of his service but he was unheard then workman caused his grievance 
before the Regional Labour Commissioner (C) Patna where conciliation proceeding was held but due to non- 
conciliatory attitude of the management, the conciliation ended in failure then FOC was sent to the appropriate Govt. 
and from there this dispute is sent here to this tribunal vide a reference for adjudication. It is further asserted that 
since the workman worked against the permanent vacant post of attender, so his termination is covered u/s-2(OO) of 
the I. D. Act, 947. It is further asserted that the duties of the workman was perennial in nature and his status was of 
an temporary attender so his service should have been confirmed after expiry of six month’s so management violated 
the provision of section-25(F) of the I.D.Act, 947 as neither any notice nor any retrenchment compensation was 
given to the workman. It is also asserted that management resorted unfair labour practice as per section-25(T) of the I 
D. Act,!947. So the action of the management terminating the service of the workman from 9.02.2020 is neither just 
and proper. Thus workman seeks relief (s) :- 


(i) #0 his reinstatement in the service as a temporary attender with back wages; 

(ii) ©The workman be regularised in the service of the bank as a attender; 

(iii) Rs. l0,000/- ( Rupees Ten Thousand ) be awarded to the workman for contesting the dispute; 
(iv) Any other relief as tribunal deems fit and proper; 


3. On the other hand the management bank filed written statement on 27.04.2022 stating therein opposite 
parties are the officers of the Canara Bank which is a Nationalized Bank all over India. It is further asserted that vide 
notification no.- G.S.R I55 dated- 04.03.2020 of the Government of India, “Syndicate Bank” have been amalgamated 
with Canara bank w.e.f 0.04.2020 that’s why the management ( Canara Bank ) is filing written statement. It is 
further asserted that the management denies all averments and allegations contained in the statement of claim filed by 
the workman side. It is further asserted that employee of the Canara Bank are broadly classified into two categories 
workman and officers employees. The service conditions of the workman employees are governed by Canara Bank 
service code which is in consonance with various Bipartite Settlement and awards settled at Industry level. It is 
further submitted that for the cleaning and dusting of the branches of the bank is under taken by the permanent 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 485] 


employees who is called as “House Keeper-cum-Peon” and some times in case of their absence branch engage 
persons intermittently as and when required and it is settled principles, such intermittent engagement would not create 
any right over the post to the person so engaged. It is further asserted that the complainant was neither the empanelled 
temporary attender of the Syndicate Bank, Danapur cantonment branch nor his name is reflecting in any records at 
the then Syndicate Bank, Regional Office, Patna. It is further asserted that the workman was engaged by the branch 
purely on day to day basis and he had never been appointed after following any recruitment process. He was 
discharged on 9.02.2020 because of the post of the permanent attender in the branch of the bank. It is further 
asserted that the workman was paid wages on daily basis as an when he was engaged in the branch. It is further 
asserted that workman has never under gone any recruitment process of the bank and he was never appointed on any 
regular post of the bank so there is no question of termination or retrenchment from the service and this is also held in 
various judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court. It is further asserted that on scrutinizing the documents, it is 
confirmed that the claimant has never participated in the procedure formation of temporary attender / PTS panel. 
Hence the workman is not entitled for any relief. 


4. Having gone through the statement of claim and the written statement filed on behalf of the management 
side, the following points emerge for adjudication:- 


(0) “Whether the workman discharged his duties continuously as temporary attender from 7.06.209 
to 9.02.2020 in the Syndicate Bank ( Now called Canara Bank ) with the duties as described in the 
claim petition. 


(ii) “Whether the action of the management of Canara Bank ( before amalgamation the then Syndicate 
Bank), Patna Bihar, in removing the services of Shri Kanhai Kumar Singh, Temporary Attender, w.e.f. 
9.02.2020 is just &proper? , if not, to what relief the workman concerned is entitled to?” 


5. In order to establish the claim of the workman, the workman side examined Kanhai Kumar Singh the 
workman himself as W.W-| and besides oral evidence, workman side also filed some documents and gets marked as 
Exts as:- 


(i) Ext.-W-An application of dt- 06.06.209 filed by the workman to the Branch Manager, Syndicate 
Bank, Danapur Cantt. Branch for the temporary attender. 


(i) Ext.-W/l-An application was forwarded by the manager to the Regional Office of Syndicate Bank. 
(iii) Ext.-W/2-Statement of Bank account from the period of 2.06.209 to 8.02.2020 i.e I page. 


6. On the other hand management side examined altogether three witnesses who are namely Sri Ashok Kumar, 
retired officer of Canara Bank, (M.W-! ), Sri Arun Kumar, Retired from Canara Bank, (M.W-2 ), and Sri Sanish 
Kumar, Senior Manager in Canara Bank, Ranch, Lalpur Branch, ( M.W-3 ) besides oral evidence, management also 
filed document and get it marked as Exts as:- 


6). Ext.-M- Senior Manager, General Administration Section, Regional Office II, Patna written a letter 
on 28.07.2020 to the Senior Manager, HOII:, HRMD, Gandhi Nagar Annex, Bengaluru regarding 
details of working of workman Kanhai Kumar Singh, temporary attender Danapur Cantonment Branch 
from the month’s of June-209 to February-2020. 


7. Now first of all this tribunal securitizes the evidence of workman first W.W-! Kanhai Kumar Singh is the 
workman himself and who has deposed before this tribunal that he was doing the work of attender in Syndicate 
Branch of Danapur Cantonment Branch from 7.06.20!9 for which he has given an application to the Branch 
Manager put his initial receiving the same and proved the documents marked as Ext.-W. This witness also proved the 
forwarding of his application by the Branch Manager to Regional Manager, Syndicate Bank as Ext.-W/l. This 
witness further stated that he used to come to the branch at 9.30A.M and work their till 6.30 P.M during his duty he 
opened the bank gate and ATM gate, cleaning of the system and counters and at the instruction of the manager took 
out the cash box from the volt the same he used to placeof the cash counter. He also did the work of placing the 
registers to the counter, making bundle of vouchers but on query of this tribunal this workman categorically admitted 
that there was one PTS posted in the branch. This witness further stated that he was getting Rs. 560/- wages per day 
that was credited in his account and he further proved his statement of bank account of the period from 2.06.209 to 
8.02.2020 as Ext.-W/2. He also stated that he got cash payment from 7.06.209 to 20.06.209 through vouchers. 
This witness further stated he was doing duty like a attender. This witness further stated that when ever he was sent to 
the clearing house he received conveyance allowance of Rs.50/- in his account. This witness further stated that when 
even system did not work he received wages of 4-5 days at a time. This witness further stated that he also received 
bonus of Rs. 5400/- from the bank on 6.09.209 i.e evident from his statement of his account. He further stated that 
when ever PTS was absent he performed his duty also and he received the payment of PTS too of the said period. 
This witness further stated that when he discharged his duties at the said branch as a temporary attender there was no 
permanent attender posted there and on 9.02.2020 manager reported him now permanent attender is posted in the 
bank, so you are not required to come to the branch but no notice and compensation was given to him and this 
witness further stated that he should be reinstated in the bank with back wages. 


4852 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In cross-examination this witness categorically admitted in para-20 he has used the word engagement in his 
application ( Ext.-W ) not the word appointment. He also admits in para-2! of the cross-examination he does not 
know the difference between permanent attender and temporary attender but so far he knows permanent attender use 
to get payment once in a month and temporary attender does not get payment at monthly basis. This witness admits 
that in para-24 of the cross-examination he got all the payment from the bank for his duty as attender and bank made 
payment as per rules. In para-27 of the cross-examination this witness categorically stated that there is bank circular 
that the person works 90 days continuously he would be taken up as a permanent staff but he has no document as 
such and in para-28 of the cross-examination this witness categorically stated that this is not fact that his 
application(Ext.-W/l )was never forwarded by the manager but he admits the petition is without the signature of the 
workman and manager. This witness also admits in para-32 of the cross-examination that he has no grievance with 
the bank officers and he further stated this is not fact he was well aware of doing work as temporary basis. 


8. Now this tribunal scrutinizes the evidence of the management side M,W-! Ashok Kumar who is retired 
officer of the Canara Bank deposed before this tribunal on 09.02.2023. This witness] stated in his examination-in- 
chief that he was Assistant Manager in Danapur Cantonment Branch of Syndicate Bank, ( now called Canara Bank ) 
from July 208 to June 20I9. This witness further stated that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh has given an application 
during his tenure for temporary daily wager that was forwarded to Regional Office but during his tenure workman 
Kanhai Kumar Singh not performed any duty on temporary basis. 


In cross-examination this witness admits that he has been transferred to Begusarai Branch on !4.06.209 so 
he can’t say whether any written reply of Regional Office was received about Kanhai Kumar Singh but he admits that 
on 06.06.209 workman has given written application to his branch that is marked Ext.- W. by the workman side. 


9. M.W-2 Arun Kumar is also a retired bank employee of Canara Bank who stated before this tribunal that he 
was posted in Regional Office of Syndicate Bank from October-208 to May 2020 but during his tenure at Regional 
Office, no application of Kanhai Kumar Singh was received from Danapur Cantonment Branch of Syndicate Bank. 
This witness further stated that no information from Danapur Cantonment Branch of Syndicate Bank was received to 
his Regional Office about working of Kanhai Kumar Singh has daily wager. This witness further stated that Branch 
Manager can engaged daily wager on requirement basis for this engagement no advertisement is required to be given. 
This witness further stated that Branch Manager can engage daily wager on exigency of work. 


In cross-examination this witness categorically admits in para-7 he was chief manager in the Regional Office 
of the Syndicate Bank. In para-l0 of the cross-examination this witness categorically stated that he can’t say how 
many days Kanhai Kumar Singh worked in bank. In para-4 of the cross-examination this witness categorically 
proved the letter dt-06.03.2020 that was issued from the Regional Office in his signature to Kanhai Kumar Singh in 
connection with the letter dt- !9.02.2020 given by Kanhai Kumar Singh that is marked Ext.-W/3. 


0. M.W-3 Sanish Kumar, Senior Manager of the Canara Bank, Lalpur Branch of Ranchi who deposed before 
this tribunal on 2.04.2023. This witness stated in examination- in — chief that he was HR Manager in the year 209 
in the Regional Office of the Canara Bank, Patna now Syndicate Bank is merged in Canara Bank. This witness 
further stated that cleaning work is used to performed by HKP and if the HKP is not posted in any branch, the Branch 
Manager can engage daily wager as per requirement for cleaning work. This witness further stated that workman 
Kanhai Kumar Singh never participated for PTS panel. This witness further stated that this is not fact that Regional 
Manager has instructed Branch Manager, Danapur Cantonment Branch not to take any work from Kanhai Kumar 
Singh. This witness further stated that Kanhai Kumar Singh was never in approved panel of bank. Kanhai Kumar 
Singh never put his attendance in attendance register. This witness further stated that Kanhani Kumar Singh never 
participated in any recruitment process. This witness further proved the letter of dt- 28.07.2020 that was sent to HR 
Head Department on the basis of the application given by Kanhai Kumar Singh in which it was reported Kanhai 
Kumar Singh was never in approved panel of the bank and there was no permission given by Regional Office for his 
engagement and payment and it is also reported payment for the engagement of the workman has been made to his 
account on daily basis. It is also reported the signature of workman on debit voucher is made on daily basis for his 
payment of wage and it is also reported since the workman was engaged on daily wages so there is no need to issue 
prior notice and proved the letter as the Ext.-M. 


In cross-examination this witness categorically admits in para-l5 that on the basis of representation of workman the 
report was given to the HR Head Department about the attendance of workman. In apra-8 this witness admits that in 
banking industries there is three categories of workman, part time workman, permanent workman and temporary 
workman. In para-20 of the cross-examination this witness categorically stated that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh 
was never called for empanelment. In para-25 of the cross-examination this witness categorically stated that workman 
has worked in bank from June-20l9 to February 2020 and during that period there was no HKP or permanent 
attender posted in Danapur Cantonment Branch. In para-32 of the cross-examination this witness categorically stated 
that the workman has daily wager not as temporary attender. In para-35 of the cross-examination this witness 
categorically stated that no notice or compensation was given to the workman because he was daily wager. 


Il. It is argued from the workman side that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh discharged the duties of a attender in 
Danapur Cantonment Branch of Syndicate Bank from !7.06.209 to 8.02.2020 and he was getting @ Rs. 560/- per 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4853 


day for his wages that was credited in $.B Account that is evident from the statement of bank account ( Ext.-W/2 ) 
but he was stopped from working on 9.02.2020 without giving prior notice and notice pay this termination is 
covered u/s-2(OO) of the I.D.Act. Workman Kanhai Kumar Singh has thoroughly supported his claim of his working 
in his evidence he has filed his application to the Branch Manager, Syndicate Bank, Danapur Cantonment Branch on 
06.06.209 for the engagement as temporary attender that was received by the then Branch Manager ( Ext.-W ). It is 
further argued that the duties of the workman was perennial in nature but his services was discontinued, by the bank 
disclosing him permanent attender has been posted now. So this is a violation of section-25(T) of the I.D.Act. It is 
also argued that the application of workman Kanhai Kumar Singh received by BranchManager on 06.06.20I9 was 
forwarded to the Regional Office that is Ext.-W/I. It is further argued that under the instruction of Regional Office 
Kanhai Kumar Singh started working in the Danapur Cantonment Branch as temporary attender for which he was 
paid by bank on prodata basis of the permanent attender. Since workman was duly engaged by the bank so he should 
be reinstated by the bank and further to regularise his service. 


2. On the other hand it is argued by the learned counsel of the management bank that Kanhai Kumar Singh was 
engaged in the Danapur Cantonment Branch of syndicate Bank as a daily wager on requirement basis for which he 
was duly paid. It is further argued that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh was never empanelled in the list of the bank 
and workman never participated in the recruitment process rather Danapur Cantonment Branch on exigency of work 
engaged the workman as daily wager this is duly reported by Senior Manager, Head Office of HR Bengaluru on 
28.07.2020 on the basis of representation given by Kanhai Kumar Singh and it was categorically reported that Kanhai 
Kumar Singh was not in approved panel of the bank and there was no permission given by the Regional Office for 
his engagement and he was paid in his account on the daily basis and also disclosed about his working from June- 
209 to February 2020 that shows that he was engaged by the Danapur Cantonment Branch total 80 days only and 
finally he was disengaged on 9.02.2020 because permanent attender was posted there and this is duly supported and 
corroborated by the all three witnesses produced by the management that was purely engaged on exigency of work as 
daily wager and he was never participated in recruitment process and when the permanent attender is posted in the 
said branch there was no requirement for his service as a daily wager thus bank has not violated any provision of the 
I.D.Act and moreover, the workmans claim his application was forwarded by the Branch Manager to the Regional 
Manager is incorrect because the Ext.-W/I as placed by the workman bears no signature of the Branch Manager 
accordingly it appears a prepared document placed by the workman side that is exposed by Ext.-M placed by the 
management side so management action for removing the services of Kanhai Kumar Singh from 9;02.2020 is just 
and proper. 


3. Considering all the facts and materials available on the record as discussed above and considering the 
submissions as advanced on behalf of both the sides, this tribunal finds that the workman Kanhai Kumar Singh raised 
his dispute before the conciliation officer for terminating his services by the management bank from 9.02.2020 
without any notice or retrenchment compensation and so action of the management is improper and on just when his 
dispute was not settled before the conciliation officer the reference was sent by the appropriate government to this 
tribunal to adjudicate whether the action of the management of Canara Bank in removing the services of Kanhai 
Kumar Singh temporary attender from 9.02.2020 is just and proper? This tribunal further finds that workman Kanhai 
Kumar Singh deposed before this tribunal and supported he has worked as a temporary attender from06.20l9 to 
9.02.2020 Danapur Cantonment Branch of Syndicate Bank and he discharged various kinds of duty from 9.30 A.M 
to 5.30 P.M and he was paid @ Rs. 560/- per day and the amount was credited in his account. This facts is also duly 
admitted by the management side that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh was engaged by the Danapur Cantonment 
Branch from June—209 to February 2020 as a daily wager and for which he was duly paid on daily basis. This 
tribunal further finds that the workman duly admits in his evidence that bank has made payment of his wages. It 
shows that there is no dispute about the payment of his daily wage further there is no dispute on this fact that 
workman Kanhai Kumar Singh has discharged his duties from !7.06..209 to 9.02.2020 only that shows that he has 
worked only 80 days in total as daily temporary attender for which he was duly paid and this is duly proved by the 
management vide its Ext.-M in which all details has been reported by the Regional Office, Patna to the Head Office, 
HR Department Bangaluru regarding the engagement of Kanhai Kumar Singh by Danapur Cantonment Branch on 
daily wage and the break up of the working of Kanhai Kumar Singh of each months is also shown and bank has also 
reported that there was no permission given by the Regional Office to the Branch for the engagement of workman. 
Rather Danapur Cantonment Branch has engaged Kanhai Kumar Singh on exigency of the work and bank has very 
honestly reported Kanhai Kumar Singh was not in approved panel of the bank and there was no need of prior notice 
because he was engaged on daily wage basis and when permanent staff was posted there then Kanhai Kumar Singh 
was disengaged from 9.02.2020. This tribunal further finds that the Ext.-M as placed by the management side is not 
countered by the workman either by oral or documentary evidence, so his claim he should be reinstated and further he 
should be regularised in the service of bank is not acceptable at all under the provision of the I.D.Act because 
workman Kanhai Kumar Singh was purely engaged as a daily wager. Of course his payment was made by the 
Danapur Cantonment Branch in the S.B Account of the workman showing at a temporary attender but on that very 
basis workman claims he is entitled for reinstatement is not just and proper because workman Kanhai Kumar Singh 
was not engaged for one year continuously in the calendar year before his terminating date- 9.02.2020 rather 
workman Kanhai Kumar Singh was engaged for only !7.06.209 to 9.02.2020 so his claim he was terminated by the 


4854 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


bank without prior notice is not acceptable at all because there is no violation of section-25(F) of the I.D.Act unless a 
workman has been engaged in continuous service for more than 240 days in a calendar year. Here in the instant case 
Kanhai Kumar Singh has discharged his duties only !80 days from June-209 to Feb.2020. So he never discharged 
duties in the management bank 240 days in continuation in a calendar year that is condition precedent for issuance of 
notice preceding the termination of any workman. 


4. Thus on scanning all the materials available on the record as discussed above, this tribunal finds and hold 
that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh has been failed to establish that he was ever engaged in continuation of his 
service for more than 240 days in a calendar year preceding his disengagement date 9.02.2020 in the management 
bank and on the other hand management bank has thoroughly established that workman Kanhai Kumar Singh was 
engaged purely as a daily wager by the Danapur Cantonment Branch of Syndicate Bank on exigency of the work and 
when permanent staff posted at that branch. Kanhai Kumar Singh was disengaged, this is duly established by the 
management bank through oral and documentary evidence. Thus this tribunal finds and hold that action of the 
management of Syndicate Bank ( before amalgamation the then Syndicate Bank ) Patna in removing the service of 
Kanhai Kumar Singh from 9.02.2020 is just and proper and so this is the considered opinion of this tribunal that 
workman Kanhai Kumar Singh is not entitled for any relief.This award is effected after date of publication in gazette. 
This is my award accordingly. 

Dictated & Corrected by me. 

Date : 2.09.2024 


MANOJ SHANKAR, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 5 नवम्बर, 2024 
का.आ. 2055.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम t947 (947 का 44+) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में केन्द्रीय सरकार 
पाटिल रेल इन्फ्रास्ट्रक्चर प्रा. लिमिटेड के प्रबंधतत्र, संबद्ध नियोजको और उनके कर्मकारो के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिश्ट औद्योगिक 
विवाद में केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण » श्रम न्यायालय मुम्बई-][ के पंचाट (28/205) ver ra करती है। 
[सं. एल - 40I2/4/20I5- आई आर (a-I)] 
सलोनी, उप निदेशक 


New Delhi, the 5th November, 2024 


S.O. 2055.—In pursuance of Section 7 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the Award (Ref.28/205) of the Cent.Govt.Indus.Tribunal-cum-Labour Court 
Mumbai -II_ as shown in the Annexure, in the industrial dispute between the management of _Patil Rail 
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd_and their workmen. 


[No. L-402/4/205- IR (B-I)] 
SALONI, Dy. Director 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL NO.2, MUMBAI 
PRESENT 
SHRIKANT K. DESHPANDE 
Presiding Officer 
REFERENCE NO.CGIT-2/28 of 20I5 
EMPLOYERS IN RELATION TO THE MANAGEMENT OF 

PATIL RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE PVT. LTD. 
The Managing Director, 

Patil Rail Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. 

Udvada (R.S.) 

Dist. Valsad, Gujarat — 396 I85 FIRST PARTY 


AND 
THEIR WORKMEN. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4855 


Shri Santosh Damodar Mestry, 


D/08 Triveni Sangam Society, Gundvali Hill, 


Andheri East, 
Mumbai — 400 069 SECOND PARTY 
APPEARANCES: 
First Party : Mr. Umesh Tiwari 
Advocate 
Second Party : Mr. R. D. Bhat 
Advocate 
AWARD 


(Delivered on 24-07-2024) 


This Reference has been made by the Central Government in exercise of powers under clause (d) of sub- 
section (l) and sub-section (2A) of Section 0 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 947, vide Government of India, 
Ministry of Labour & Employment, New Delhi, order No. L-4I02/4/205 — IR (B-I) dated 2!.04.205. The terms 
of reference given in the schedule are as follows: 


SCHEDULE 


“Whether the action of the management of M/s. Patil Rail Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Valsad, Gujarat in 
terminating the services of Shri Santosh Damodar Mestryw.e.f. 92.07.20703 without complying various 
provisions of the law under Industrial Dispute Act, /9१47, is just and legal? If not, what relief the workman is 
entitled to?” 


2. According to the Second party, he joined the services of the First Party Company on 0.0.200 as temporary 
employee then he was appointed on probation w.e.f. 0!.05.20l0. He was given designation as “Liaison Officer” but 
work done by him was clerical nature. He had no powers whatsoever. No persons were working under him and after 
considering the work and conduct, he was designated as Executive R & M and B.D. — (M-I) with total emoluments 
of Rs. 5,680/- per month. 


The Second Party added that, without any written intimation the company stopped giving work to him from 
07.03.20i3, he enquired to the General Manager to whom he was reporting and he was informed that, the work will 
be given to him however except promises and assurances work was not given to him. The Second Party further added 
that, he was bound by Model Standing Orders as per Central Rules and not by appointment order. As per Model 
Standing Orders the Company required to give one month notice before termination or to follow the prescribed 
provisions of Section 25-F & 25-G of Industrial Disputes Act. Even as per appointment order 3 months prior notice 
was required to be given but there is no compliance as such the termination is illegal. The Second Party also added 
that, he studied up to l0" std., he tried to obtain alternate employment therefore not in gainful employment, thus the 
Second Party prays for the relief of reinstatement with continuity of service alongwith all benefits w.e.f. 02.07.20I3 
and request to answer the Reference in affirmative. 


3. The First Party Company resisted the statement of claim by reply Ex-0, the First Party contended that, the 
Second Party joined the Company on 0.0i.20l0 on temporary basis then appointed on probation of 6 months. He 
was the temporary workman of the company, working as a “Liaison Officer” and as a Liaison Officer he used to 
approach the Government Railway Office/ Premises for filling the tender in the name of company, he was taking 
decision, mentioning the rates in tender on behalf of the company and his decisions were binding on the company as 
such the Second Party is not a “workman” as defined u/s. 2 (s) of the I.D. Act and the Court has no jurisdiction to 
entertain the matter. 


The First Party Company further contended that, the Second Party was not their employee therefore the 
applicability of the Model Standing Order does not arise at all. The Second Party himself stopped reporting for work 
of the company, hence there is no termination nor retrenchment much less illegal as alleged. The First Party denied 
that, the Second Party tried to obtain alternate employment. Lastly the First Party urged that, the Second Party failed 
to justify the demand therefore not entitled for relief as prayed and ultimately prayed that, the Reference be answered 
in the negative. 


4. My Learned Predecessor framed the issues at Ex-7. I have re-arranged & rewarded the Reasons to them are as 
below: 


Sr. No. Findings 


i || Whether the Second Party workman proves that, he is a workman ie ee 


4856 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


l. under the definition of Industrial Disputes Act [947? 
Yes. 
Whether the First Party Company proves that, the Second Party 
2s workman has abandoned the services of the First Party 
Company? No. 
Whether the Second Party workman proves that, his services are 
3. illegally terminated by the First Party Company? 
Yes 
Whether the Second Party entitled for reinstatement with 
4. continuity of service and full back wages w.e.f. 
02.07.203? Yes, Partly. 
3 What order? As per Award. 
REASONS 


5. गा support of claim, the Second Party submitted an affidavit (Ex-0) in lieu of examination in chief of Santosh 
Damodar Mestry (himself), subjected himself for cross examination. Whereas the First Party Company submitted an 
affidavit Ex-2 in lieu of examination in chief of Mahesh Haddiguddi, General Manager of the First Party Company, 
subjected him for cross examination. Perused the written notes of arguments submitted by both the Parties. Heard the 
Mr. R.D. Bhatt Advocate for the Second Party and inspite of opportunity none present for the First Party. 


6. Issue No. - It is worthwhile to mention here that, It is contended on behalf of the First Party that, the Second 
Party was working as a “Liaison Officer”, he used to approach the Government Office for filing the tender in the 
name of company, mentioning the rates in tenders on behalf of the company and decision taken by him was binding 
on the company. The total emoluments of the Second Party workman was Rs. [5,680/- and the post on which the 
Second Party was promoted i.e., Executive R & M and B.D. — (M-]) is a post of Managerial nature therefore Second 
Party is not a ‘workman’ as defined under the ID Act 947. 


As against this, it is submitted on behalf of the Second Party that, though the designation of Liaison Officer 
was given to the Second Party, the actual work done by him was clerical in nature, he had no powers whatsoever and 
no persons were working under him. Though his designation was as Executive R & M and B.D. — (M-I]) his total 
emoluments was Rs. 5,680/-. He was reporting to Mr. Mahesh Haddiguddi as such he is a ‘workman’ as defined 
under the ID Act. 


7. After careful scanning the respective pleadings of the Parties in the light of oral as well as documentary 
evidence of the Parties, it has come on record that, the Second Party was initially appointed as a temporary employee 
on 0.0.20I0, then he was appointed on probation by order dated 0.05.200 and he was given the work of “Liaison 
Officer”. The Second Party stated on oath before the court that, though the designation was as a “Liaison Officer” he 
was doing a work of clerical nature. Whereas the First Party pleaded in the reply that, the Second Party was not 
permanent employee and as a “Liaison Officer” the Second Party was taking the decisions on behalf of the company, 
those were binding on the company and he was submitting tenders in the name of company. 


It will not be out of place to mention here that, during proceedings the Second Party was fully cross-examined by the 
Counsel for the First Party however except the suggestion that, the appointment was as a “Liaison Officer” nothing 
has been brought on record in respect of work performed by the Second Party as Liaison Officer and as Executive R 
& M and B.D. Moreover the witness of the First Party fairly admitted in cross-examination that, the tenders are 
generally signed by him in the capacity of General Manager, the Second Party has no authority to act on behalf of the 
First Party Company in any manner and the Second Party was reporting to him. The First Party miserably failed to 
establish before the Court about the work performed by the Second Party as a “Liaison Officer” as well as Executive 
R & M and B.D., as such it is very difficult to accept that, the work performed by the Second Party as a “Liaison 
Officer” and Executive R & M and B.D. were supervisory or managerial in nature as such it can be safely said that, 
the Second Party workman is a “workman” under the definition of the Industrial Disputes Act 947, Hence I answer 
this issue in the affirmative. 


8. Issue No. 2 & 3- Both these issues are inter-related therefore answered together. 


According to the Second Party, his services were terminated by the First Party w.e.f. 07.03.20i3, whereas the 
First Party alleged that, the Second Party abandoned the services of the First Party. The term ‘abandonment of 
service’ and ‘termination of service’ both are parallel and result of both is same i.e. out of employment. In earlier the 
employee stop going to work, whereas in later the employers stop giving work to the employee. So let us consider 
whether the Second Party abandoned the services of the First Party or First Party terminated the service of the Second 
Party. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4657 


It is worthwhile to mention here that, though the First Party alleged about abandonment of service by the Second 
Party, however the First Party nowhere pleaded in the reply that, since when the Second Party stopped reporting for 
work, what efforts made by him for securing the presence of the Second Party, who was working as a “Liaison 
Officer” and Executive R & M and B.D., since more than three years in the company. Not only this but, the First 
Party could not brought anything about the intention of the Second Party regarding leaving job through his cross- 
examination. In fact abandonment of service needs to be established by conduction of enquiry, admittedly no enquiry 
was conducted against the Second Party and in absence of efforts taken by the First Party in securing the presence of 
the Second Party, it will be unsafe to say that, the Second Party voluntarily abandoned the services of the First Party. 


Once it is established that, there is no abandonment of service by the Second Party then the case certainly 
falls under termination of service of the Second Party by the First Party. On careful perusal of the copies of 
appointment orders available on record it seems that, on the basis of interview dated 30.04.200, the Second Party 
was appointed as a “Liaison Officer” by order dated 0.05.20l0. The appointment of the Second Party was on 
probation of one year and it further reveals that, by order dated 07.07.20I] i.e. after more than one year, the Second 
Party was promoted as Executive R & M and B.D. - (M-I]) w.e.f. 0.04.20] i.e. certainly after completion of 
probation period and it is clear that Clause of the Appointment letter dated 0.05.20l0, remained unchanged. It 
certainly goes to show that, the Second Party workman was Permanent employee of the First Party. 


Needless to say that, as per appointment order, The Company reserves the rights to terminate the services without 
assigning any reason by giving three months notice in writing or three months salary in lieu thereof. Admittedly at the 
time of termination no such notice of three months was given to the Second Party as such the termination of the 
Second Party is contrary to the appointment order. 


Similarly, as observed earlier that, the Second Party completed his probation period of one year then his 
services are certainly governed by the Standing Orders and as per the Standing Orders notice of one month is 
necessary before terminating the services. The First Party did not issue any one month notice to the Second Party 
before termination therefore the termination of the Second Party is in violation of the Standing Orders also. 


Not only this but, the Second Party was in continuous service of the First Party since 20l0 to 203 i.e. more 
than 240 days, as such it was obligatory on the part of the First Party to comply with the necessary provisions of 
Section 25-F & 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act, while terminating the services of the Second Party. In the case in 
hand, the Second Party was not given one month notice nor notice pay in lieu of notice and retrenchment of 
compensation and in absence of that, the termination of the Second Party is also in violation of the provisions of 
Section 25-F & 25-G of the Industrial Disputes Act. In brief the services of the Second Party workman are illegally 
terminated by the First Party Company. Hence I answer these issues accordingly. 


9. Issue No. 4- Once it is established that, the alleged termination of the Second Party is illegal then it is liable to be 
set aside and the Second Party workman is certainly entitled for relief of reinstatement with continuity of service with 
full back wages. 


It is pertinent to note here that, the Second Party has specifically pleaded in the statement of claim that, he 
studied upto 0" standard, tried to obtain alternate employment therefore he was not in gainful employment, During 
cross-examination it has come on record that, the mother of the Second Party is living with him, he is residing in 
Mumbai on monthly rent of Rs. ,000/-. True it is that, the First Party could not bring any substantial material on 
record in respect of the gainful employment of the Second Party however considering the fact that, he is staying in 
rented premises and paying Rs. !,000/- per month it means he had some source of income after his termination 
therefore instead of full back wages, the Second Party is entitled for relief of the reinstatement with continuity of 
service with 50% back wages from the date of termination till reinstatement. Hence I answer this issue partly in 
affirmative. 

In the result, I proceed to pass the following Award- 
ORDER 
l. The Reference is answered partly in affirmative. 


2. The First Party Company is directed to reinstate the Second Party workman with continuity of service with 
50% back wages w.e.f. 02.07.20]3 till reinstatement within the period of two months from the date of 
publication of Award. 


3. Parties to bear their own cost. 
. The copy of the Award be sent to the Government. 
Date: 24-07-2024 


SHRIKANT K. DESHPANDE, Presiding Officer 
नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


4858 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


का.आ. 2056.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

मेसर्स सेलेबी ग्राउंड हैंडलिंग दिल्ली प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, आयात बिल्डिंग-2, अंतर्राष्ट्रीय कार्गो टर्मिनल, आईजीआई एयरपोर्ट, 

नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री कमलेश कुमार,कामगार , द्वारा -सेलेबी कर्मचारी यूनियन ,बीटीआर 

भवन, नई दिल्‍ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली 

पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 52 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को 
सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.47.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 

[सं. TA-42025/07/2024-99-aTsare (ST) 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 

S.O. 2056.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 52 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court ना New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to M/s. CELEBI Ground Handling Delhi Pvt. Ltd.,Import Building-2, International Cargo Terminal, 
IGI Airport, New Delhi, and, Shri Kamlesh Kumar, Worker, Through- CELEBI Employees Union, BTR 
Bhawan, New Delhi, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 
05..2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-99-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO.-II, NEW DELHI 
ID.No. 52/209 
Sh. Kamlesh Kumar, S/o Sh. Ram Karan., 
Through- CELEBI Employees Union, BTR Bhawan, 
3-A, Rouse Avenue, New Delhi-!0002. 


VERSUS 
M/s. CELEBI Ground Handling Delhi Pvt. Ltd. 
Import Building-2, International Cargo Terminal, 
IGI Airport, New Dlehi-!0037. 
AWARD 


This is an application of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant. Claimant had stated in his claim statement that he had been working with the respondent since 
0.02.20!7 on the post of U/H and his last drawn wages was Rs. 3,500/-. He had been performing his duties with 
sincerity, diligence, devotion and dedication since his appointment. He has unblemished and meritorious service 
record since his employment with management and he never gave any chance of complaint to the management. 
Workman had joined the trade union in order to get the legal and statutory benefits. The management got annoyed 
with the workman hence, management was looking for the ways to victimize the workman. It is submitted that one 
such opportunity came into the hands of the management when the workman demanded from the management for 
leave to attend the marriage of his brother-in-law fixed for 3!.0.20l7. He had sought leave for two days on account 
of the marriage of his brother-in-law, but the management declined to grant him leave. When the workman reported to 
attend his duties on 03..207 after attending the said marriage function the management did not allow him to attend 
his duties and illegally terminated from his services without informing the workman about his fault and giving any 
sort of opportunity to enquire against his illegal termination. The management has neither served one month notice to 
the workman nor paid any amount for the notice pay as per the provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes 
Act, 947. On dated 04..20l7 the management official Sh. Harmeet Singh, HR Executive called the workman to 
discuss and sort out the issue. But instead of resolving the issue, he blocked entry of the workman into the premises 
by detaining his entry pass. Sh. Harmeet Singh again called the workman on 07..20I7 and asked him to sign on 
some papers on the wrong pretext. When the workman later came to know that those papers were actually his 
resignation pepers which were got signed by keeping the workman in dark. The management has misled the workman 
and took away his job illegally, unjustifiably and by unfair labour practice. The management has not issued any show 
cause/charge sheet to the workman. Management has also detained personal entry pass of the workman which was 
meant for the security purpose. He had many times verbally asked the officials of the management about the reason 
for his detention, but, no clear answer was given to him. On |8.!2.207 he had sent the notice to the management but, 


[भाग [lave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4859 


the management did not reply. They have gone to the conciliation officer, but no result was yielded. Hence, has filed 
the present claim with the prayer to reinstate him with full back wages. He is unemployed since the date of 
termination from their services. 


Management had filed the W.S vide order dated 3!.05.20l9. He had denied the averment made in the claim 
statement. He submits that claim is not maintainable and is bad in law and is liable to be dismissed. 


After completion of the pleadings following issues have been framed vide order dated 6.08.209 i.e. - 


l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 

2. Whether the service of the workman was terminated illegally by the management. 
3. Whether the workman had voluntarily resigned from service. 

4. To what relief the workman is entitled to. 


Now, the matter is listed for cross-examination of the workman. Claimant has not been appearing for cross- 
examination since long, inspite of providing a number of opportunities. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim, it 
appears that he is not interested to pursue his case. His claim stands dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy 
of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 7 of the ID act 947. 
File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 23-08-2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2057.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
मेकॉन लिमिटेड, नॉर्थ crac, care मीनार, लक्ष्मी नगर डिस्ट्रिक्ट सेंटर, नई दिल्‍ली; ओरियन सिक्‍योरिटी सॉल्यूशंस 
प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, शाहपुर जाट,नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री कुलदीप, कामगार, द्वारा-दिल्ली 
प्लम्बर अलाइड इंडस्ट्रियल वर्कर्स यूनियन, गोविंद पुरी एक्सटेंशन मेन रोड कालकाजी, नई दिल्ली,, के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 55 of 2020) को जैसा 
कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.44.2024 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-498-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


9.0. 2057.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 55 of 2020) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court —II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Mecon Ltd., North Tower, Scope Minar, Laxmi Nagar District Center, New Delhi ;Orion Security 
Solutions Pvt. Ltd.,, Shahpur Jat, New Delhi, and, Shri Kuldeep, Worker, Through- Delhi Plumber Allied 
Industrial Workers Union, Govind Puri Exten. Main Road Kalkaji, New Delhi, which was received along with 
soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 05..2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-98-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 


4860 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


LD. No. 55/2020 


Sh. Kuldeep, S/o Sh. Dheeraj Singh, 

R/o-2/, Gadhi Mendu Bhajanpura, Delhi-0053. 

Through- Delhi Plumber Allied Industrial Workers Union, 
770/8, 377 Floor, Govind Puri Exten. Main Road Kalkaji, 
New Delhi-009. 


Versus 
l. Mecon Ltd. 


3" & 5" Floor, North Tower, Scope Minar, 
Laxmi Nagar District Center, New Delhi- 0092. 
2. Orion Security Solutions Pvt. Ltd. 
5-E, |* Floor, Jungi House, Street No. 5, 
Near BSES Power Station, Shahpur Jat. 
AWARD 


This is an application of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after is referred as an Act) filed 
by the claimant for his illegal termination. Claimant had stated in his claim statement that he had been working with 
the respondent-! through respondent-2 since 0.0.200 at the post of Security Guard at the last drawn salary of Rs. 
3,900/- Per month. Management-?2 is the false contractor created by management-! in violation of contract labour 
(Regulation and Abolition) Act 970. Workman service record is clean and he has not given any complaint so far. 
During the service, management had obtained his signature on blank papers and have not been providing any legal 
facilities i.e. appointment letter, Leave Book, bonus, overtime, weekly and events holidays etc. Management got 
annoyed with the demands raised by the claimants had thrown them out from the service of the management on 
09..207. He had tried to take back his service but failed. He had sent the complaint to the labour commissioner, 
but, it has yielded no result. Hence, He has filed the present claim. 


Management-! had appeared and filed the WS vide order dated 05.07.2022. Management-2 had not been 
appearing since. He had been proceeded ex-parte on the same date i.e. 05.07.2022. M- denied the averment made in 
the claim statement and stated that claim is liable to be dismissed. 


After completion of the pleadings following issues have been framed vide order dated 7.0.2023 i.e.- 

l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 

2. Whether there exist employer and employee relationship between the claimant and the management-|. 
3. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-! and management-2. 
4. To what relief the claimant is entitled to and from which date. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. He is required to file the affidavit. Despite, providing a 
number of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing the claim. His claim stands dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required 
under section 7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 4.08.2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2058.---औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
एरिया बिल्डिंग एडमिनिस्ट्रेशन कॉम्प्लेक्स, सफदरजंग एयरपोर्ट,नई दिलली;एनी टाइम सिक्‍योरिटी सर्विसिज, तुगलकाबाद 
एक्सटेंशन,नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री रविंदर सिंह, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 57 of 2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक 
में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ O5..2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[a. TaA-42025/07/2024-97-aTeaz (ST) 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 486] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2058.—In pursuance of Section I7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (/4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 57 of 2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Area Building Administration Complex, Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi ;Any Time Security 
Services, Tughlakabad Extension, New Delhi,, and, Shri Ravinder Singh, Worker, which was received along 
with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 05.].2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-97-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
ID.No. 57/2022 
Sh. Ravinder Singh, S/o Sh. Ram Niwas Singh, 
R/o C-28, Through- Sh. Ravi Gujjar, Kotla Gaon, 
New Dlehi-009I. 
Through-Lok Mazdoor Sangthan, 
B-58/456, Rama Road, New Delhi-!005. 


VERSUS 
l. Area Building Administration Complex, 
Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi-!0003. 
2. Any Time Security Services, 
TA-9, Basement, Main Okhla Road, 
Tughlakabad Extension, New Delhi-!009. 
AWARD 


This is an application of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act). Claimant 
had stated in his claim statement that he had been working with the respondent as a Security Supervisor w.e.f. 
05.06.20I7 and he has been paid wages month and his last drawn salary were Rs. l0,500/- per month. He had been 
doing his work with diligently with the management. During service tenure, workman has not been issued any 
appointment letter neither by the management-! nor the management-2. The workman has not been paid minimum 
wages as prescribed by the Government of India i.e. Rs. [7,99|/- but, he was paid to workman Rs. !0,500/- only. The 
workman demanding legal facilities and arrears from 0.04.2020 to 30.09.2020 orally to the management. For that, 
the management got annoyed and terminated the services of the workman w.e-f. l.0.2020 without assigning any 
valid reason. The action of the management in terminating the services of the workman is illegal, bad, unjust and 
malafide. In case of retrenchment no seniority list was displayed and no notice was given, no notice pay was either 
offered or paid to the workman at the time of termination of his services. He has sent the legal demand notices dated 
7.09.2020 was served upon the management, and a reply has been received but the management never take back on 
duty to the workman and it presumed that demand has been rejected. He had exhausted legal remedy i.e. going to the 
conciliation officer, but, no result was yielded. Hence he has filed the claim. 


Management-!| & 2 had appeared and filed their respective WS. They had denied the averment made in the 
claim statement. They submit that claim of the claimant is liable to be dismissed. 


After completion of the pleadings following issues have been framed vide order dated 0.0.2023 i.e. - 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 


2. Whether there exist employer and employee relationship between management no. | i.e. Area 
Building Administration Complex Safdarjung Airport and the claimant. 
3. Whether the service of the claimant has been illegally terminated by M-2. 


4. Whether the claimant has received full and final settlement from M2 and refused the offer of re- 
employment. 


5. To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


4862 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. Claimant has not been appearing since long. He has not 
brought any evidence i.e. documents and oral to substantiate his claim, inspite of providing a number of opportunities. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim, it appears that 
he is not interested to pursue his case. His claim stands dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award 
is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required under section 47 of the ID act 947. File is 
consigned to record room. 


Date: 28-08-2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2059.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
विदेश सेवा संस्थान, विदेश मंत्रालय, बेर सराय, नई दिल्ली; कम्पास इंडिया सपोर्ट सर्विसेज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, पूर्व में 
विपुल फैसिलिटी मैनेजमेंट प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, फेज-4, गुड़गांव; एस.के. फैसिलिटी मैनेजमेंट सर्विसेज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, 
गुड़गांव, हरियाणा, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री मनोज कुमार एवं 48 अन्य, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में 
निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 67 of 2045) को 
जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.47.2024 को 
प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-496-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 
9.0. 2059.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 67 of 205) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to Foreign Service Institute,Minsitry of External Affairs, Ber Sarai,New Delhi ;Compass India Support 
Services Pvt. Ltd.Formerly Known as Vipul Facility Management Pvt. Ltd.,Phase-l,Gurgaon; S.K. Facility 
Management Services Pvt. Ltd.,Gurgaon, Haryana, and, Shri Manoj Kumar & 8 others , Workers, which was 
received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 05.] .2024. 
[No. L-42025/07/2024-96-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. No. 67/205 
Sh. Manoj Kumar & 48 Workmen, 
C/o 800/9, Govindpuri Extension, 
Main Road, Kalkaji, 
New Delhi-9. 
Versus 

l. Foreign Service Institute, 

Minsitry of External Affairs, 

Baba Gang Nath Marg, 

Old JNU Campus, Ber Sarai, 

New Delhi-0067. 
2. Compass India Support Services Pvt. Ltd. 


Formerly Known as Vipul Facility Management Pvt. Ltd. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4863 


7, I“ Floor, Vipul Square, 
Sushant Lok, B-Block, Phase-| 
(प्राए807- 22002. 
3. S. K. Facility Management Services Pvt. Ltd. 
E-25, Sushant Lok-], 


Gurgaon, Haryana. 


AWARD 


Sh. P. K. Venu Gopal, Desk Officer, GOI has sent the reference to this tribunal in regard to !9 workmen 
(including Manoj Kr.) for adjudication with the following words: 


“Whether the action of the management of Foreign Service Institute (FSI) in not regularizing the 
employment of ॥9 workmen (Manoj Kumar and 8 others as per the list attached with Annexure A) 
engaged through reportedly sham and camouflage contractors namely M/s Compass India Support 
Services pvt. Ltd. is illegal and unjustified and whether the said workmen are entitled to receive pay 
at parity with regular employees of that management of concur from their respective date of 
appointment? If not, what relief the workmen are entitled to ?” 


After receiving the reference, notice was issued to both the parties. Workman had filed the written statement 
of claim. They were working with the management-! since their respective initial date of joining. Respondent-2 is a 
sham contractor, who had issued identity card to the workmen. It is further the case of the claimants that the 
management-2 has sub-leased their contract to management-3. They have been deprived from legitimate legal 
facilities. Their jobs were perennial in nature. Services records of the workmen were clean. Since their initial 
appointment, management got some blank papers/proformas signed from the workmen. Demand notice were issued to 
the management. Management had not replied. They have been terminated on 0.06.20l3 by way of oral refusal of 
duties and withheld their earned wages. Claimants had sent several complaints through union. Union as such had 
submitted that they be reinstated with full back wages. 


Respondent-l had filed the WS. He had denied the employer and employee relationship between them and the 
claimants. He submits that claims of the claimants qua him be dismissed. Right of other respondent to file the WS 
have been closed vide order dated 05.05.206. 


After completion of the pleadings following issues have been framed vide order dated 0.02.207 i.e.- 


l. | Whether the action of the management of Foreign Services Institute (FSI) is not regularizing the 
employment of !9 workmen (Manjoj Kumar and |8 others as per the list attached with Annexure A) 
engaged through reportedly sham and camouflage contractors namely M/s Compass India Support 
Services Pvt. Ltd. is illegal and unjustified ? If so its effect? 


2. Whether the said workmen are entitled to receive pay at parity with regular employees of the 
management of concur from their respective date of appointment? If so its effect? 


3. To what relief the workman is entitled to and from which date? 


Neither the workman nor the management-! had not brought any evidence to substantiate their claim in 
counter-defence. Workmen affidavit was expunged vide order dated 24.08.2022 as he has not come for cross- 
examination. Management had not led any evidence. 


In these circumstances, when the claimants have not led any evidence, their claims are resulted into failure. 
Their claims stand dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate 
government for notification as required under section 47 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 04-09-2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


4864 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SECc. 3(ii)] 


का.आ. 2060.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 44) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 

मेसर्स सेलेबी ग्राउंड हैंडलिंग दिल्ली प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, आयात बिल्डिंग-2, अंतर्राष्ट्रीय कार्गो टर्मिनल, आईजीआई एयरपोर्ट, 

नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और आई.डी. संख्या (32/2022 श्रीमती सोनल कौशिक, आई.डी. संख्या 

433/2022 श्री इशांत गर्ग, आई.डी. संख्या (34/2022 श्री कपिल कुमार, आई.डी. संख्या (35/2022 श्री अनमोल गुप्ता, 

आई.डी. संख्या 736/2022 श्री दिनेश चंद्र, द्वारा - द्वारा - भारतीय राष्ट्रीय प्रवासी श्रमिक संघ, गोविंद पुरी एक्सटेंशन मेन 

रोड, कालकाजी, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्ली 

पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 32 of 2022, 433 of 2022, 434 of 2022, 435 of 2022, 432 of 2022) को जैसा कि 

अनुलग्नक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.47.2024 को प्राप्त 
हुआ था | 

[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-200-आईआर/(डीयू)] 

दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 

New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


9.0. 2060.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 32 of 2022, 33 of 2022, 34 of 2022, 35 of 2022, 32 of 2022) 
of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court —II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in 
the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation to Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, Mahanagar 
Doorsanchar New Delhi ;The CEO, Huawei Telecommunication (India) Pvt. Ltd., Mohan Co-Operative 
Industrial Estate, New Delhi, and, I.D. No. 32/2022 Smt. Sonal Kaushik, I.D. No. 33/2022 Shri Ishant Garg, 
LD. No. 34/2022 Shri Kapil Kumar, I.D. No. 35/2022 Shri Anmol Gupta, I.D. No. 36/2022 Shri Dinesh 
Chander, Worker, Through- Through- Indian National Migrant Worker’s Union, Govind Puri Extn. Main 
Road, Kalkaji, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 05..2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-200-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. No. 32/2022 
Smt. Sonal Kaushik, W/o SH. Pankaj, 
R/o-64, Sector-9, Faridabad, Haryana-!2002. 
LD. No. 33/2022 
Sh. Ishant Garg, S/o Sh. Narender Garg, 
R/o-CI/7, Near MC Bharti School, Sanjay Enclave, 
Uttam Nagar, New Delhi-0059. 
LD. No. 34/2022 
Sh. Kapil Kumar, S/o Late Sh. Roshan Singh, 
R/o-28, |-J Near Park, PGIMS Campus, 
Rohtak, Haryana-2400]. 
LD. No. 35/2022 
Sh. Anmol Gupta, S/o Late Sh. R.K. Gupta, 
R/o- B-75, 02"4 Floor, B-Block, Lajpat Nagar-0, 
New Delhi-0024. 
LD. No. 36/2022 
Sh. Dinesh Chander, S/o Sh. Kewala Nand Bhagat, 
R/o 93-94, 03" Floor, G-30, Sector-03, Rohini, 
New Delhi-0085. 


Through- Indian National Migrant Worker’s Union, 


[भाग Il—ave 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4865 


770/8, 377 Floor, Govind Puri Extn. Main Road, Kalkaji, 
Versus 
l. Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, 
Mahanagar Doorsanchar Bhawan, Jawahar Lal Nehru Marg, 
Next to Zakir Hussain College, New Delhi-!0002. 
2. The CEO, Huawei Telecommunication (India) Pvt. Ltd., 
A-6, Mohan Co-Operative Industrial Estate, 
New Delhi-0044. 
Appearance: - 
For Claimants — : Sh. Rakesh Sharma, Ld. AR 
For Management: None for ॥/-4 
Sh. Anurag Lakhotia and Sh. Mohit Sehrawat, Ld. AR’s for M-2 
AWARD 


These are five applications of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after is referred as an Act) 
filed by the different claimants for their illegal termination. 


Counsel of the workmen submits that he wants to withdraw the present claims. His statement is recorded separately. 


In view of the above submission made by AR of the claimants, these claims stand dismissed as withdrawn. 
Awards are accordingly passed. A copy of this award is sent to appropriate government for notification under section 
7 of the I.D. Act. Files are consigned to record room. 


Date: 02-09-2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2064.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
वोडाफोन आइडिया लिमिटेड, u-9 मोहन को-ऑपरेटिव इंडस्ट्रियल एस्टेट मथुरा रोड, नई दिल्ली; निदेशक, गैप 
टेलीसर्विसिज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, डी-33 हस्तसाल विहार, उत्तम नगर, नई दिल्ली; निदेशक, एसडीएच नेटवर्क प्राइवेट 
लिमिटेड, डी-78 हस्तसाल विहार, उत्तम नगर, नई दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री शहादत हुसैन, 
कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ 
संख्या 793/2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के 

साथ 05.44.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-203-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 206l.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 93/2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal cum 
Labour Court —II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in relation 
to Vodafone Idea Ltd.,A-9 Mohan Co-operative Industrial Estate, Mathura Road, New Delhi ;The Director, 
Gapp Teleservices Pvt. Ltd., D-33 Hastsal Vihar, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi; The Director, SDH Network Pvt. 
Ltd.,D-78 Hastsal Vihar, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi, and, Shri Shahadat Hussain, Worker, which was received 
along with soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 05. | .2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-203-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


4866 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. No. 93/2022 
Sh. Shahadat Hussain, S/o Sh. Mohd. Taha, 
R/o- 562, Housing Bord Colony, Sector-29, 
Faridabad, Haryana-2008. 
Through- Indian National Migrant Worker’s Union, 
770/8, 0370 Floor, Govind Puri Extn. Main Road Kalkaji, 
New Delhi-009. 


Versus 

l. Vodafone Idea Ltd., 

A-!9 Mohan Co-operative Industrial Estate 

Mathura Road, New Delhi-0044. 
2. The Director, Gapp Teleservices Pvt. Ltd., 

D-33 Hastsal Vihar, Uttam Nagar, New Delhi-!0059. 
3. The Director, SDH Network Pvt. Ltd., 

D-78 Hastsal Vihar, Uttam Nagar, 

New Delhi-0059. 
Appearance: - 
For Claimants : Sh. Rakesh Sharma, Ld. AR. 
For Management 7 Sh. Anurag Kumar for the management-!. 

AWARD 


This is an application of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after is referred as an Act) filed 
by the claimant for his illegal termination. Claimant had stated in his claim statement that he had been working with 
the respondent-| through respondent-2 and respondent-3 since 08.02.20I8 at the post of OFC Executive at the last 
drawn salary of Rs. 38,200/- Per month. Management-2 & 3 are the false contractor created by management-| in 
violation of CONTRACT LABOUR (REGULATION AND ABOLITION) ACT 970 nor the Government has 
registered the respondent No. 2 under the said Act nor any contractor has any license to work M/s VODAFONE 
IDEA LTD. has any contract made between the employer and the contractor is false (SHAM) and 
(CAMOUFLAGE).Workman service record is clean and he has not given any complaint so far. During the service, 
management had obtained his signature on blank papers and has not been providing any legal facilities i.e. 
appointment letter, Leave Book, bonus, overtime, weekly and events holidays etc. Management got annoyed with the 
demands raised by the claimants had thrown them out from the service of the management on 09.]|.20]7. He had 
tried to take back his service but failed. He had sent the complaint to the labour commissioner, but, it has yielded no 
result. Hence, He has filed the present claim. 


Management-! had appeared and stated that the matter has been settled between the contractor and the 
workman and he had paid the amount in full and final settlement. 


Workman has not been appearing since long. Workman AR submits that the workman is not in touch with 
him. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing the claim, this tribunal has no option 
except to pass the no dispute award. No Dispute Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the 
appropriate government for notification as required under section |7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record 
room. 


Date: 02-09-2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


[भाग त---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4867 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2062.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
भारतीय भारोत्तोलन महासंघ, टोडापुर गांव, नई दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री ऋषि पाल, द्वारा - 
दिल्‍ली मजदूर यूनियन, अजमेरी गेट, दिल्ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम 
न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 247 of 2079) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है 

जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.44.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-204-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2062.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 247 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court —II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation Indian Weightlifting Federation, Todapur Village, New Delhi, and, Shri Rishi Pal, Worker, Through - 
Delhi Mazdoor Union, Ajmeri Gate, Delhi, which was received along with soft copy of the award by the Central 
Government on 05.][.2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-20-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 


LD. NO. 247/209 

Sh. Rishi Pal, S/o Sh. Chanderpal Singh, 

Through-Delhi Mazdoor Union, 

5239, Ajmeri Gate, Delhi-0006. 

Versus 

l. Indian Weightlifting Federation, 
WZ-78, * Floor, Todapur Village, 
New Delhi-002. 


Appearance: 
For Claimants 7 None 
For Managements : None 


AWARD 


This is an application U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by the 
claimant for his illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that he was appointed by the management on the post of Office 
Assistant on 27.02.2004 and his last drawn wages was Rs. [2,73/- per month. The management has not given the 
appointment letter to him. He has been doing his duty with diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the 
management for any complaint.The management did not provide the legal facility of Appointment letter, minimum wages, 
House Rent Allowances, Pay Slip, Causal Leave, Leave Encashment, Conveyance Allowances etc. to him. When the 
workman demanded the same, the management got annoyed with him and the management has started to get rid to him, but 
failed and on 23.0!.20i9 the management has illegally terminated the workman from his services, without paying the 
earned wages for the month of January, 20l9, and without any rhyme or reason to workman. On 8.02.209, the workman 
had sent a demand notice to the management through his Union, but the management neither given any reply nor reinstated 
to workman on duty. The workman had filed a complaint before the ALC, Central Jeevandeep Building, New Delhi against 
the management but, it was resulted into failure. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


Respondent has not been appearing since long. Management’s right to file W.S had been closed because of its 
non-appearance in 202]. Issues have not been framed. Thereafter the matter was listed for workman evidence. Despite 
providing a number of opportunities, no one has been appearing on behalf of the claimant to substantiate his claim. 


4868 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing his claim. His claim stands dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required under 
section |7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 237 October, 2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2063.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 4) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, दिल्ली विश्वविद्यालय (डीयू), विश्वविद्यालय परिसर, दिल्ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, नरेंद्र एंटरप्राइजेज, शक्ति नगर, 
दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्रीमती फूल मणि, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 267 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ O5.7.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-490-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2063.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 267 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU),University Campus, Delhi; The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, Shakti Nagar, Delhi, and, Smt. Phool Mani, Worker, which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 05..2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-90-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. NO. 267/209 
Smt. Phool Mani, W/o Sh. Prem Singh, 
R/o- 27/49, Bengali Colony, A-, Sant Nagar, 
Burari, Delhi-0084. 
Versus 

l. The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU), 

University Campus, Near New Administrative 

Block, Delhi-0007. 
2. The Managing Director, 

Narender Enterprises, 

26/8, Shakti Nagar, Delhi- !0007. 


Appearance: 
For Claimants : None 
For Managements 7 Sh. Rakshit Rai (Proxy) for ॥(-4. 


AWARD 


This is an applications U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant for her illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that she was employed as a Sanitation Worker (Safai 
Karmachari) by management no. | since 2008. She has remained in continuous, uninterrupted service for around |] 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4869 


years with रञक्षा42शालशा-, Work performed by the workman is perennial in nature. She has been doing her duty with 
diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the management for any complaint. The last drawn salary of 
the claimant was credited into his bank accounts by the M-l. Since December 208, her wages has been reduced to 
Rs. 3,350 p.m. from Rs. 5,070/- p.m. without any prior notice. On 3.2.8 he along with other terminated 
workmen made a representation before the Provost, North East students House for women, University of Delhi to 
revise the wages cut of Rs. !720 p.m. They have met the provost of the hostel and the M-2 for numerous times to 
revise the deduction in their wages but the administration was adamant in their stand and did not revise their wages 
and management got furious with the claimant and threatened to terminate the services. On 3.05.209 the claimant 
along with other terminated workmen made a representation to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and before the Hon’ble Labour Minister of India, to revise the deduction in their 
wages. On 3l.07.20I9 respondents terminated the services of the claimant without any prior notice from the premises 
of respondent-. After her illegal termination she is jobless. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


Respondent-2 was proceeded ex-parte vide order dated !.02.2020. Respondent- had filed the WS and denied the 
relationship of employer and employee between the management and the workmen. 


In the absence of the claimant, vide order dated 23.08.2022 following issues has been framed i.e.: 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 
2. Whether there exists employer and employee relationship between the claimant and management-|. 


3. Whether the contract between management-! and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the legal 
rights of the claimant. 


4. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-|. 
5. To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. She is required to file her affidavit. Despite, providing a 
number of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate her claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing her claim. Her claim stands 
dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as 
required under section |7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 9" September, 2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2064.-औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, दिल्ली विश्वविद्यालय (डीयू), विश्वविद्यालय परिसर, दिल्ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, नरेंद्र एंटरप्राइजेज, शक्ति नगर, 
दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्रीमती इंदर, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 268 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया 
है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.47.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-494-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 

S.O. 2064.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 268 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU),University Campus, Delhi; The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, Shakti Nagar, Delhi, and, Smt. Inder, Worker, which was received along with soft copy of 

the award by the Central Government on 05.] .2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-9l-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


4870 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 

LD. NO. 268/209 
Smt. Inder, W/o Sh. Leelu, 
R/o- N-7/A-45, Old Chandrawal, Civil Line S.O., 
Delhi-0054. 
Versus 
. The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU), 

University Campus, Near New Administrative 

Block, Delhi-0007. 
2. The Managing Director, 

Narender Enterprises, 


26/8, Shakti Nagar, Delhi- 0007. 


Appearance: 
For Claimants : None 
For Managements ‘Sh. Rakshit Rai (Proxy) for ॥(-4. 


AWARD 


This is an applications U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant for her illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that she was employed as a Sanitation Worker (Safai 
Karmachari) by management no. | since 2009. She has remained in continuous, uninterrupted service for around |] 
years with management-l. Work performed by the workman is perennial in nature. She has been doing her duty with 
diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the management for any complaint. The last drawn salary of 
the claimant was credited into his bank accounts by the M-l. Since December 208, her wages has been reduced to 
Rs. 3,350 p.m. from Rs. 5,070/- p.m. without any prior notice. On 3I.2.8 he along with other terminated 
workmen made a representation before the Provost, North East students House for women, University of Delhi to 
revise the wages cut of Rs. !720 p.m. They have met the provost of the hostel and the M-2 for numerous times to 
revise the deduction in their wages but the administration was adamant in their stand and did not revise their wages 
and management got furious with the claimant and threatened to terminate the services. On 3.05.209 the claimant 
along with other terminated workmen made a representation to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and before the Hon’ble Labour Minister of India, to revise the deduction in their 
wages. On 3l.07.20I9 respondents terminated the services of the claimant without any prior notice from the premises 
of respondent-|. After her illegal termination she is jobless. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


Respondent-2 was proceeded ex-parte vide order dated !.02.2020. Respondent-! had filed the WS and 
denied the relationship of employer and employee between the management and the workmen. 


In the absence of the claimant, vide order dated 23.08.2022 following issues has been framed i.e.: 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 
2. Whether there exists employer and employee relationship between the claimant and management-|!. 


3. Whether the contract between management-! and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the legal 
rights of the claimant. 


4. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-]. 
5. To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. She is required to file her affidavit. Despite, providing a 
number of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate her claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing her claim. Her claim stands 
dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as 
required under section I7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 9" September, 2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


[भाग IVE 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक i8, :946 487] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2065.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, जवाहरलाल नेहरू विश्वविद्यालय, न्यू महरौली रोड, नई दिल्ली; मैक्स मेंटेनेंस लिमिटेड, मयूर विहार फेज-ाा, 
दिल्ली; सुदर्शन फैसिलिटीज प्राइवेट लिमिटेड, मदनगीर, दिल्ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री गोविंद 
कुमार,कामगार, अखिल भारतीय जनरल कामगार यूनियन, जहांगीरपुरी, दिल्‍ली, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय 
सरकार औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह-श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 268 of 2022) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक 

में दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ O5..2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-202-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2065.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 268 of 2022) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court —II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi; Max Maintenance 
Ltd., Mayur Vihar Phase-III, Delhi; Sudarshan Facilities Pvt. Ltd.,Madangir, Delhi, and, Shri Govind Kumar, 
Worker,Through-All India General Kamgar Union, Jahangirpuri, Delhi, which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 05..2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-202-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
ID.No. 268/2022 
Sh. Govind Kumar, S/o Sh. Jiya Lal, 
Through-All India General Kamgar Union 
C-90-Z, DDA Flats Jahangirpuri, Delhi-0033. 
VERSUS 
l. The Registrar, 
Jawaharlal Nehru University, 
New Mehrauli Road, New Delhi-!0067. 
2. Max Maintenance Ltd., 
C-05/99-00, New Kondili, 
Mayur Vihar Phase-III, Delhi-!0096. 
3. Sudarshan Facilities Pvt. Ltd., 
8, Local Shopping Centre, 2"! Floor, 
Madangir, Delhi-!0062. 
AWARD 


This is an application of U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act). Claimant 
had stated in his claim statement that he had been working with the respondent-! at the post of Sanitation worker since 
several years through various sham and bogus contractors. He has been in continuous, uninterrupted service for more 
than two years with the respondent-! and he was also issued identity card of several so-called contractors. The tenure 
of the employment for all the service years has been more than 240 days per year. The period of the workman is also 
same as permanent worker. He used to mark his attendance every day in the register placed in the office of Section 
Officer (officer-in-charge) of every hostel. The workman was given the superficial designation of supervisor. He had 


4872 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


been doing his work with diligently and honestly performing his duties as assigned by the concerned officials of the 
respondent-! despite difficulties, workplace challenges and non-payment of various statutory dues. He has also been 
working even during the COVID-l9 pandemic and performed excellent duties for respondent-!. Workman through 
their union has raised various issues regarding labour law violations before the appropriate authority and as well as the 
management. Respondent has repeatedly engaged in unfair labour practices such as threatening the workers for 
participating in union activities and raising genuine grievances before the respondents. Respondent-3 on the explicit 
directions of the respondent-! forced the worker to sign a performa which made it obligatory for a worker to not join 
any union but, the claimant objected to his proforma and asked the workers to refrain from signing such a document 
which is completely illegal. The workman was actively involved in mobilizing the workers working in the respondent- 
l premises and have protested many times against unfair labour practices happening in the university. Due to these 
activities, he was threatened multiple times by the JNU administration for termination of his services. Claimant had 
also filed an application before Dy. CLC (Central) raising his grievances, of non-payment of wages, unfair labour 
practices, threat of termination and other issues, and the workmen also who were employed in the same category of 
work. The claimant was illegally terminated by the respondent after the application filed by the workman. The 
termination of the services of the workmen is completely arbitrary, illegal and without profound logic. He is jobless 
and facing financial difficulties. He has gone to the conciliation officer, but, no result was yielded. Hence he has filed 
the claim with the prayer to reinstate him in same position. 


Management-! had appeared and filed the WS. Both management-2 &3 have not appeared despite being 
served. Management-| had denied the averment made in his claim statement. He submits that claim of the claimant is 
not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed. 


Now, the matter is listed for filing of rejoinder against W.S of management-|. Claimant has not been 
appearing since long for filing rejoinder. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim, it 
appears that he is not interested to pursue the case. This tribunal has no option except to pass the no disputant award. 
No dispute award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as 
required under section 47 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 06/08/2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2066.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, दिल्ली विश्वविद्यालय (डीयू), विश्वविद्यालय परिसर, दिल्ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, नरेंद्र एंटरप्राइजेज, शक्ति नगर, 
दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री जॉनी, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार औद्योगिक 
अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍न्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 269 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नरक में दिखाया गया 

है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.47.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-492-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2066.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 269 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU),University Campus, Delhi; The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, Shakti Nagar, Delhi, and, Shri Johney, Worker, which was received along with soft copy 
of the award by the Central Government on 05.].2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-92-IR(DU)] 
DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


[भाग ]--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक I8, 946 4873 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. NO. 269/209 
Sh. Johney, S/o Sh. Elam Singh, 
R/o-A-28, Street No. ll, Bhajanpura Garhi Mandu, 
Harijan Basti Shahdara, Delhi-0053. 
Versus 

l. The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU), 

University Campus, Near New Administrative 

Block, Delhi-0007. 
2. The Managing Director, 

Narender Enterprises, 


26/8, Shakti Nagar, Delhi- !0007. 


Appearance: 
For Claimants : None 
For Managements 7 Sh. Rakshit Rai (Proxy) for ॥(-4. 


AWARD 


This is an applications U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant for his illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that he was employed as a Sanitation Worker (Safai 
Karmachari) by management no. | since 2008. He has remained in continuous, uninterrupted service for around |] 
years with management-!. Work performed by the workman is perennial in nature. He has been doing his duty with 
diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the management for any complaint. The last drawn salary of 
the claimant was credited into his bank accounts by the M-l. Since December 208, his wages has been reduced to 
Rs. 3,350 p.m. from Rs. 5,070/- p.m. without any prior notice. On 3.2.8 he along with other terminated 
workmen made a representation before the Provost, North East students House for women, University of Delhi to 
revise the wages cut of Rs. !720 p.m. They have met the provost of the hostel and the M-2 for numerous times to 
revise the deduction in their wages but the administration was adamant in their stand and did not revise their wages 
and management got furious with the claimant and threatened to terminate the services. On 3.05.209 the claimant 
along with other terminated workmen made a representation to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and before the Hon’ble Labour Minister of India, to revise the deduction in their 
wages. On 3l.07.20i9 respondents terminated the services of the claimant without any prior notice from the premises 
of respondent-!. After his illegal termination he is jobless. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


Respondent-2 was proceeded ex-parte vide order dated !.02.2020. Respondent-! had filed the WS and 
denied the relationship of employer and employee between the management and the workmen. 


In the absence of the claimant, vide order dated 23.08.2022 following issues has been framed i.e.: 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 
2. Whether there exists employer and employee relationship between the claimant and management-|!. 


3. Whether the contract between management-! and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the legal 
rights of the claimant. 


4. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-]. 
5. To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. He is required to file his affidavit. Despite, providing a 
number of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing his claim. His claim stands dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required 
under section 7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 9" September, 2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


4874 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2067.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा ॥7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, दिल्ली विश्वविद्यालय (डीयू), विश्वविद्यालय परिसर, दिल्ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, नरेंद्र एंटरप्राइजेज, शक्ति नगर, 
दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्रीमती मुन्नी देवी, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 270 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 

दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.74.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 
[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-493-आईआर/(डीयू)] 


दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2067.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 270 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU),University Campus, Delhi; The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, Shakti Nagar, Delhi, and, Smt. Munni Devi, Worker, which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 05..2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-93-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. NO. 270/209 
Smt. Munni Devi, W/o Sh. Ram Khilari, 
R/o- N-64/70, Indra Basti, Timarpur, Civil Lines, 
Delhi-0054. 
Versus 
l. The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU), 
University Campus, Near New Administrative 
Block, Delhi-0007. 
2. The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, 
26/8, Shakti Nagar, Delhi- 0007. 
Appearance: 
For Claimants :None 
For Managements 7 Sh. Rakshit Rai (Proxy) for ॥(-4. 
AWARD 


This is an applications U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant for her illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that she was employed as a Sanitation Worker (Safai 
Karmachari) by management no. | since 2002. She has remained in continuous, uninterrupted service for around 7 
years with management-l. Work performed by the workman is perennial in nature. She has been doing her duty with 
diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the management for any complaint. The last drawn salary of 
the claimant was credited into his bank accounts by the M-l. Since December 208, her wages has been reduced to 
Rs. 3,350 p.m. from Rs. 5,070/- p.m. without any prior notice. On 3.2.8 he along with other terminated 
workmen made a representation before the Provost, North East students House for women, University of Delhi to 
revise the wages cut of Rs. !720 p.m. They have met the provost of the hostel and the M-2 for numerous times to 
revise the deduction in their wages but the administration was adamant in their stand and did not revise their wages 
and management got furious with the claimant and threatened to terminate the services. On 3.05.209 the claimant 


[भाग त---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4875 


along with other terminated workmen made a representation to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and before the Hon’ble Labour Minister of India, to revise the deduction in their 
wages. On 3!.07.209 respondents terminated the services of the claimant without any prior notice from the premises 
of respondent-!. After her illegal termination she is jobless. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


Respondent-2 was proceeded ex-parte vide order dated .02.2020. Respondent-! had filed the WS and 
denied the relationship of employer and employee between the management and the workmen. 


In the absence of the claimant, vide order dated 23.08.2022 following issues has been framed i.e.: 


I; Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 
2. Whether there exists employer and employee relationship between the claimant and management-|. 
3. Whether the contract between management-! and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the legal 


rights of the claimant. 
4. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-|. 
2: To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. She is required to file her affidavit. Despite, providing a 
number of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate her claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing her claim. Her claim stands 
dismissed. Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as 
required under section 47 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 9" September, 2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2068.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, दिल्ली विश्वविद्यालय (डीयू), विश्वविद्यालय परिसर, दिल्ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, नरेंद्र एंटरप्राइजेज, शक्ति नगर, 
दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्री हरि प्रकाश, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ Heat 277 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्रक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.74.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-494-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 


New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2068.—In pursuance of Section !7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 27l of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU),University Campus, Delhi; The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, Shakti Nagar, Delhi, and, Shri Hari Prakash, Worker, which was received along with soft 
copy of the award by the Central Government on 05..2024. 


[No. L-42025/07/2024-94-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 
ANNEXURE 


BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. NO. 273/209 
Hari Prakash, S/o Sh. Dhan Prakash, 
R/o-B-30, Sangam Park, R.P. Bagh, 
Delhi-0009. 


4876 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Versus 

l. The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU), 

University Campus, Near New Administrative 

Block, Delhi-0007. 
23 The Managing Director, 

Narender Enterprises, 

26/8, Shakti Nagar, Delhi- 0007. 
Appearance: 
For Claimants None 
For Managements 7 Sh. Rakshit Rai (Proxy) for ॥(-4. 

AWARD 


This is an applications U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant for his illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that he was employed as a Sanitation Worker (Safai 
Karmachari) by management no. | since 2008. He has remained in continuous, uninterrupted service for around |] 
years with management-!. Work performed by the workman is perennial in nature. He has been doing his duty with 
diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the management for any complaint. The last drawn salary of 
the claimant was credited into his bank accounts by the M-l. Since December 208, his wages has been reduced to 
Rs. 3,350 p.m. from Rs. 5,070/- p.m. without any prior notice. On 3.2.8 he along with other terminated 
workmen made a representation before the Provost, North East students House for women, University of Delhi to 
revise the wages cut of Rs. !720 p.m. They have met the provost of the hostel and the M-2 for numerous times to 
revise the deduction in their wages but the administration was adamant in their stand and did not revise their wages 
and management got furious with the claimant and threatened to terminate the services. On 3.05.209 the claimant 
along with other terminated workmen made a representation to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and before the Hon’ble Labour Minister of India, to revise the deduction in their 
wages. On 3l.07.20I9 respondents terminated the services of the claimant without any prior notice from the premises 
of respondent-l. After his illegal termination he is jobless. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


Respondent-2 was proceeded ex-parte vide order dated .02.2020. Respondent-! had filed the WS and 
denied the relationship of employer and employee between the management and the workmen. 


In the absence of the claimant, vide order dated 23.08.2022 following issues has been framed i.e.: 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 
2. Whether there exists employer and employee relationship between the claimant and management-!. 


3. Whether the contract between management-! and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the legal 
rights of the claimant. 


4. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-]. 
5. To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 


Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. He is required to file his affidavit. Despite, providing a 
number of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate his claim. 


In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing his claim. His claim stands dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required 
under section 7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 


Date: 9" September, 2024 
ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


नई दिल्‍ली, 6 नवम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 2069.--औद्योगिक विवाद अधिनियम (4947 का 74) की धारा i7 के अनुसरण में, केन्द्रीय सरकार 
रजिस्ट्रार, दिल्ली विश्वविद्यालय (डीयू), विश्वविद्यालय परिसर, दिल्ली; प्रबंध निदेशक, नरेंद्र एंटरप्राइजेज, शक्ति नगर, 


[भाग त---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : नवम्बर 9, 2024/कार्तिक 8, 946 4877 


दिल्‍ली, के प्रबंधतंत्र के संबद्ध नियोजकों और श्रीमती नीलू तनुट बाई, कामगार, के बीच अनुबंध में निर्दिष्ट केन्द्रीय सरकार 
औद्योगिक अधिकरण- सह- श्रम न्‍्यायालय-2 नई दिल्‍ली पंचाट(संदर्भ संख्या 272 of 2049) को जैसा कि अनुलग्नक में 
दिखाया गया है, प्रकाशित करती है जो केन्द्रीय सरकार को सॉफ्ट कॉपी के साथ 05.74.2024 को प्राप्त हुआ था | 


[सं. एल-42025/07/2024-95-आईआर/(डीयू)] 
दिलीप कुमार, अवर सचिव 
New Delhi, the 6th November, 2024 


S.O. 2069.—In pursuance of Section |7 of the Industrial Dispute Act, 947 (4 of 947), the Central 
Government hereby publishes the award (Ref. No. 272 of 209) of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal 
cum Labour Court — II New Delhi as shown in the Annexure, in the Industrial dispute between the employers in 
relation to The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU),University Campus, Delhi; The Managing Director, 
Narender Enterprises, Shakti Nagar, Delhi, and, Smt. Neelu Tanut Bai, Worker, which was received along with 
soft copy of the award by the Central Government on 05.].2024. 

[No. L-42025/07/2024-95-IR(DU)] 


DILIP KUMAR, Under Secy. 


ANNEXURE 
BEFORE CENTRAL GOVT. INDUSTRIAL TRIBUNAL-CUM-LABOUR COURT NO-II, NEW DELHI 
LD. NO. 272/209 
Smt. Neelu Tanut Bai, W/o Sh. Suresh, 
R/o- 27/49, Bengali Colony, A-0l, Sant Nagar Burari, 
Delhi-0084. 


Versus 

l. The Registrar, University of Delhi (DU), 

University Campus, Near New Administrative 

Block, Delhi-0007. 
2. The Managing Director, 

Narender Enterprises, 

26/8, Shakti Nagar, Delhi- 0007. 
Appearance: 
For Claimants : None 
For Managements 7 Sh. Rakshit Rai (Proxy) for ॥(-4. 

AWARD 


This is an applications U/S 2A of the Industrial Disputes Act (here in after referred as an Act) filed by 
the claimant for her illegal termination. Claim of the claimant is that she was employed as a Sanitation Worker (Safai 
Karmachari) by management no. | since 20i0. She has remained in continuous, uninterrupted service for around | ] 
years with management-l. Work performed by the workman is perennial in nature. She has been doing her duty with 
diligently and honestly and did not give any chance to the management for any complaint. The last drawn salary of 
the claimant was credited into his bank accounts by the M-l. Since December 208, her wages has been reduced to 
Rs. 3,350 p.m. from Rs. 5,070/- p.m. without any prior notice. On 3I.2.8 he along with other terminated 
workmen made a representation before the Provost, North East students House for women, University of Delhi to 
revise the wages cut of Rs. !720 p.m. They have met the provost of the hostel and the M-2 for numerous times to 
revise the deduction in their wages but the administration was adamant in their stand and did not revise their wages 
and management got furious with the claimant and threatened to terminate the services. On 3.05.209 the claimant 
along with other terminated workmen made a representation to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Chief Labour 
Commissioner (Central), New Delhi and before the Hon’ble Labour Minister of India, to revise the deduction in their 
wages. On 3!.07.209 respondents terminated the services of the claimant without any prior notice from the premises 
of respondent-!. After her illegal termination she is jobless. Hence, he filed the present claim. 


4878 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA :NOVEMBER 9, 2024/KARTIKA 8, 946 [PART II—SEc. 3(ii)] 


Respondent-2 was proceeded ex-parte vide order dated |.02.2020. Respondent-| had filed the WS and denied the 
relationship of employer and employee between the management and the workmen. 


In the absence of the claimant, vide order dated 23.08.2022 following issues has been framed i.e.: 
l. Whether the proceeding is maintainable. 
2. Whether there exists employer and employee relationship between the claimant and management-|. 


3. Whether the contract between management-! and 2 was sham and intended to camouflage the legal rights of 
the claimant. 


4. Whether the service of the claimant was illegally terminated by the management-]. 

5. To what relief the claimant is entitled to. 

Now, the matter is listed for workman evidence. She is required to file her affidavit. Despite, providing a number 
of opportunities, workman has not been appearing since long to substantiate her claim. 

In these circumstances, when the claimant is not interested in pursuing her claim. Her claim stands dismissed. 
Award is passed accordingly. A copy of this award is sent to the appropriate government for notification as required under 
section |7 of the ID act 947. File is consigned to record room. 

Date: 9"" September, 2024 

ATUL KUMAR GARG, Presiding Officer 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-0064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-0054. 


GORAKHA NATH 
YADAVA 


