रजिस्ट्री सं. डी.एल.- 33004/99 REGD. No. 0. L.-33004/99 


Ftd = VistWa 
Che Gazette of Jndia 


सी.जी.-डी.एल.-अ.-23092024-257408 
CG-DL-E-23092024-257408 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 


भाग त--खण्ड 3--उप-खण्ड (ii) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii) 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


सं. 3812] नई दिल्‍ली, सोमवार, सितम्बर 23, 2024/आशिवन 1, 1946 
No. 3812] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 23, 2024/ASVINA 1, 1946 


गृह मंत्रालय 
अधिसूचना 
नई दिल्ली, 23 सितम्बर, 2024 


का.आ. 4169(अ).--केंद्रीय सरकार ने, विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिनियम, 1967 
(1967 का 37) (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिनियम कहा गया है) की धारा 3 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त 
शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, भाग Il, खंड 3, 
उपखंड (1), तारीख 12 मार्च, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1296(अ), तारीख 12 मार्च, 2024 
(जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिसूचना कहा गया है) के द्वारा जम्मू कश्मीर नेशनल फ्रन्ट (जेकेएनएफ) को 
विधिविरुद्ध संगम के रूप में घोषित किया था; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) के साथ पठित धारा 5 की उपधारा 
(1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते हुए, भारत सरकार के गृह मंत्रालय की भारत के राजपत्र, असाधारण, 
भाग Il, खंड 3, उपखंड (ii), तारीख 5 अप्रैल, 2024 में प्रकाशित अधिसूचना संख्यांक का.आ. 1628(अ), तारीख 
5 अप्रैल, 2024 के द्वारा विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण (जिसे इसमें इसके पश्चात उक्त अधिकरण 
कहा गया है) का गठन किया था, जिसमें दिल्‍ली उच्च न्यायालय की न्यायाधीश न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा थीं; 


और, केंद्रीय सरकार ने उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (1) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग करते 


6177 GI/2024 (1) 


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY ——_—sX[PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY PART II—SEC. 3(ii 


हुए, इस न्यायनिर्णयन के प्रयोजन के लिए कि क्या जम्मू कश्मीर नेशनल ee (जेकेएनएफ) को विधिविरुद्ध संगम 
के रूप में घोषित किए जाने का पर्याप्त कारण था या नहीं, तारीख 9 अप्रैल, 2024 को Sear अधिकरण को उक्त 
अधिसूचना निर्दिष्ट की थी; 


और, उक्त अधिकरण ने, उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (3) द्वारा प्रदत्त शक्तियों का प्रयोग 
करते हुए, उक्त अधिसूचना में की गई घोषणा की पुष्टि करते हुए तारीख 6 सितम्बर, 2024 को एक आदेश पारित 
किया था; 


अत:, अब, केंद्रीय सरकार उक्त अधिनियम की धारा 4 की उपधारा (4) के अनुसरण में, उक्त अधिकरण 
के आदेश को प्रकाशित करती है, अर्थात्‌:- 


---: अधिकरण का आदेश अंग्रेजी भाग में छपा है :--- 
(न्यायमूर्ति नीना बंसल कृष्णा) 


विधिविरुद्ध क्रियाकलाप (निवारण) अधिकरण” 


[फा. सं. 14017/56/2024/एन.आई.-एम.एफ.ओ.] 
अभिजीत सिन्हा, संयुक्त सचिव 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 3 


MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 23rd September, 2024 
S.O. 4169(E).— Whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub- 
section (1) of section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) (hereinafter 
referred to as the said Act), declared the Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF) as an unlawful 
association vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs, number S.O. 


1296(B), dated the 127 March, 2024 (hereinafter referred to as the said notification) published in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (ii), dated the 12" March, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) 
of section 5 read with sub-section (1) of section 4 of the said Act constituted the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the said Tribunal) consisting of Justice Neena Bansal 
Krishna, Judge, High Court of Delhi vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, number S.O. 1628(E), dated the 5" April, 2024 published in the Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (1), dated the 5th April, 2024; 


And, whereas, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) 
of section 4 of the said Act referred the said notification to the said Tribunal on 97 April, 2024 for the 
purpose of adjudicating whether or not there was sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu Kashmir 
National Front (JKNF) as an unlawful association; 


And, whereas, the said Tribunal in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of 
section 4 of the said Act, passed an order on 6" September, 2024, confirming the declaration made in 
the said notification. 


Now, therefore, in pursuance of sub-section (4) of section 4 of the said Act, the Central 
Government hereby publishes the order of the said Tribunal, namely :- 


“UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL, 
HIGH COURT OF DELHI, NEW DELHI 
Date of Decision: September 6", 2024 
IN THE MATTER OF: 
Gazette Notification no. S.O.1296(E) dated 12" March 2024 declaring the Jammu Kashmir National 
Front (JKNF), as an unlawful association under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 
AND IN THE MATTER OF: 


Reference under Section 4 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 made to this Tribunal by 
the Government of India through Ministry of Home Affairs vide Gazette Notification no. S.O. 1628(E) 
dated 5" April 2024. 


Present : Dr. Ajay Gulati, Registrar, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal. 


Ms. Aishwarya Bhati (Addl. SG) along with Mr. Amit Prasad, Mr. Rajat Nair, Ms. 
Poornima Singh, Ms. Manisha Chava and Mr. Abhijeet Singh, ld. Advocates for the 
Union of India. 


Mr. Parth Awasthi, and Ms. Deepika Gupta ld. Advocates for Union Territory of 
Jammu & Kashmir. 


Mr. Sameer Shukla, Asstt. Section Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs, GOI. 
Mr. Arjun Chopra, Law Researcher. 

CORAM: 

HON’BLE Ms. JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ORDER 


1. This order answers the Reference under Section 4(3) read with Section 3(3) of the Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act’ or ‘UA(P)A’, for short) made to 
this Tribunal which has been constituted by the Central Government vide Gazette Notification no. 
S.0.1628(E) dated 57 April, 2024 under Section 5(1) of the ‘Act’, for adjudicating whether or not there 
is sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu Kashmir National Front (‘JIKNF?’ in short), as an ‘unlawful 
association’. 


I. THE NOTIFICATION 

2. The Central Government published Gazette Notification (extra-ordinary) no. 8.0. 1296(E) 
dated 12 March, 2024 in exercise of powers conferred under Section 3(1) of the Act and declared JKNF 
to be an ‘unlawful association’. A copy of the said notification has been sent to this Tribunal, as 


contemplated under Rule 50) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 (““UA(P) Rules” in 
short). The said notification dated 12" March, 2024 reads as under: 


“S.O. 1296(E)-Whereas, the Jammu Kashmir National Front (hereinafter referred to 
as the JKNF) chaired by Nayeem Ahmed Khan, is indulging in unlawful activities, which are 
prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty and security of the country; 


And whereas, members of the JKNF have remained involved in supporting terrorist 
activities and anti-India propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and 
providing logistic support to terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir; 


And whereas, the leaders and members of JKNF have been involved in mobilizing 
violent protest in various parts of Jammu and Kashmir for perpetrating unlawful activities, 
including supporting terrorist activities, sustained stone-pelting on Security Forces in Jammu 
and Kashmir; 


And whereas, JKNF has constantly asked the people of Kashmir to refrain from taking 
part in elections and thereby targeted and hampered the very basic constitutionally recognized 
fundamentals of Indian democracy; 


And whereas, the JKNF and its members by their activities show sheer disrespect 
towards the constitutional authority and constitutional set up of the country; 


And whereas, JKNF is involved in promoting, aiding and abetting secession of Jammu 
and Kashmir from India by involving in anti-national and subversive activities; sowing seeds 
of dis-affection amongst people; exhorting people to destabilize law &order; encouraging the 
use of arms to separate Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India; promoting hatred against 
established Government, giving clarion call to boycott elections on multiple occasions in 
Jammu and Kashmir; 


And whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion that if there is no immediate 
curb or control of unlawful activities of the Jammu Kashmir National Front, it will use this 
opportunity to- 


(i) continue with the anti-national activities which are detrimental to the territorial integrity, 
security and sovereignty of the country; 


(ii) continue advocating the secession of the Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India 
while disputing its accession to the Union of India; and 


(iii) continue propagating anti-national sentiments among the people of Jammu and Kashmir 
with the intention to cause disaffection against India and disrupt public order; 


And whereas, the Central government for the above-mentioned reasons is firmly of the 
opinion that having regard to the activities of the Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF), it is 
necessary to declare the Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF), as an ‘unlawful association’ 
with immediate effect; 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 5 


Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 3 of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central Government hereby 
declares the Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF )as an unlawful association; 


The Central Government, having regard to the above circumstances, is of firm opinion 
that it is necessary to declare the Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF) as an ‘unlawful 
association’ with immediate effect, and accordingly, in exercise of the powers conferred by the 
proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the said Act, the Central Government hereby directs 
that this notification shall, subject to any order that may be made under Section 4 of the said 
Act, have effect for a period of five years from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.” 


3. As can be seen, the aforesaid notification enumerates the reasons/ circumstances, as 
contemplated under proviso to Section 3(3) of the Act, for declaring the JKNF as unlawful with 
immediate effect. 


Il. THE BACKGROUND NOTE 


4. Along with the reference to this Tribunal under Section 4 of the UA(P)A, the Central 
Government has submitted before this Tribunal a Background Note, as contemplated under Rule 5(ii) 
of the UA(P) Rules, 1968. 


>: The Background Note states that Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF) is a separatist 
organization, formed by Nayeem Ahmad Khan in 1989 and he has been heading JKNF as its Chairman. 
JKNEF has been supporting terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and 
Kashmir. It was established as an upper ground organization to provide logistic support in Jammu and 
Kashmir to terrorists and to popularize and strengthen the terrorist and secessionist networks. Objective 
of JKNF has been to separate Jammu and Kashmir from India. It supported the Pakistani agenda of 
generating feeling of hatred and disaffection against the country, to achieve the bigger goal of 
amputating Jammu and Kashmir from India. 


6. JKNF is involved in terrorism/anti-national propaganda besides fueling and causing law-and- 
order incidents in Jammu and Kashmir. Its primary role is to portray a negative image of counter- 
insurgency operations in Jammu and Kashmir, glorifying the terrorist activities, mobilizing public 
opinion against India and propagating false narrative as well as to incite youth to indulge in violent 
activities and in joining terrorist ranks. JK NF, under the patronage of Nayeem Ahmad Khan has been 
unabatedly involved in spreading hatred and disaffection against India, vilifying Indian state, launching 
attacks on the government of the day, provoking and inciting youth into violence, spawning protests, 
disclaiming and disrupting the sovereignty and integrity of India, and extending covert and overt support 
to proscribed anti-national organizations and terrorist organizations. 


7. Present Leadership/Executive Members of JKNF are: 
SL. Name Designation Address 
No. 
1. Nayeem Ahmed Khan @ Firdous s/o | Chairman Pathanpora Khore, Pattan, Baramulla 
Ghulam Mohammad Khan 
23 Abdul Qayoom s/o Abdul Gaffar Vice- Baramulla 
Chairman-I 
3. Abdul Salam Rather s/o Mohammad Vice- Ushkar, Baramulla 
Ramzan Rather Chairman-II 
4. Narinder Singh Khalisa Vice Jammu 
Chairman-III 
5. Mohammad Khalil Kawa s/o Ali | Spokesman Botengoo, Sopore 
Mohammad Kawa 
a Abdul Rashid Malik Executive Kupwara 
Member 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


8. JKNF is a secessionist group which not only propagates secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir 
through hartal calls, election-boycott, communal disharmony, provoking gullible youth to street- 
violence, arson, stone-pelting and to join terrorist ranks but also glorifies terrorism by visiting the 
families of the terrorists killed by security forces, to pay tributes. 


9. JKNE along with other separatist organizations fanned the sentiments of the people against the 
Government over Shri Amarnath Land Row in 2008 through their misinformation campaign and by 
spreading false information which resulted in Amarnath Land Row agitation causing large scale 
violence and damage to the public and private properties. JKNF actively nurtured and financed the stone 
pelters who were lured in to continuing violent protests and other anti-national activities. Muzaffarabad 
Chalo call was given by a co-ordination committee, in which JKNF played a pivotal role in organizing 
and addressing mobs across the valley, when the people of Jammu and Kashmir were appealed to march 
to Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir. In the subsequent law and order situation, 
few civilians including separatist leader Sheikh Aziz died which further escalated the street violence. 
A total of around 449 stone pelting incidents on Security Forces were reported, in which 53 civilians 
died and 522 got injured, besides 170 Police/ Security Forces personnel also getting injured. 


10. In order to give a massive thrust to Pakistani agenda in sustaining its terrorist and secessionist 
ecosystem in Jammu and Kashmir, JKNF in a calculated manner portrayed the death of two ladies in 
Shopian in the year 2009 by describing it as rape and murder perpetrated by the security forces. The 
entire design was to create a false narrative against the Central Government and its law enforcement 
agencies, so as to generate hatred and disaffection against India among the general masses. JKNF 
played a significant role in issuing Hartal calls, which had resulted in intense law and order issues. 
Death of some stone pelting youth in Kashmir valley, during handling of law and order in the year 2010, 
was exploited by the separatists to accelerate momentum to their ‘Quit Kashmir’ campaign. Nayeem 
Ahmad Khan circulated protest posters and shut-down programs from time to time to create valley wide 
disturbances. JKNF played a pivotal role in instigating youth to continue and fuel up mass unrest by 
issuing various protest calendars which resulted in long drawn protests during the year. A total of around 
2794 stone pelting incidents were reported in which 112 civilians lost their lives, 1047 got injured while 
01 police personnel attained martyrdom and around 5188 police/ Security Forces personnel got injured 
in these incidents. 


11. JKNF, after the killing of Burhan Wani in 2016 and acting on the instructions of Pakistan and 
ISI, exploited the situation intensely and actively provoked, incited and lured the youth of Jammu and 
Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the valley and in order to keep the anti-India pot boiling, 
announced hartal calls and issued protest calendars which resulted in the death of 86 persons and 
injuries to 8932 civilians. 2 Police Jawans were martyred and about 8370 police/ Security Forces 
personnel also got injured in these riots. 


Criminal Cases against JKNF activists 


12. The complicity of JKNF cadres in criminal and anti-national activities is evident from the series 
of criminal cases that stand registered against them under various provisions of law including the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act and other substantive offences. The cases registered against the 
JKNE activists/ members provide clinching evidence regarding their involvement in various unlawful 
activities. A list of cases registered by the National Investigation Agency (NIA), Directorate of 
Enforcement and Government of Jammu & Kashmir is given as under: 


05.2017 u/s 120B, 
121, 121A & 124A 
IPC , and u/s 13, 16, 
17, 18, 20, 38, 39 


secessionist and separatist leaders including 
the members/ cadres of Hurriyat Conference, 
have been acting in connivance with active 
militants of proscribed terrorist organisations 
viz. Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e- 


51. FIR No. & Police Brief of Investigation Details of accused 
No. | Station persons 
1. RC- The case was registered by the NIA based on | Nayeem Ahmad 
10/2017/NIA/DLI the information that Hafiz Muhammad Saeed, | Khan & others 
dated May 30. Amir of Jammat-ud-Dawah भाव the 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


and 40 UA(P)A 


NIA Delhi 


Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), and other 
terrorists organizations/ associations/ gangs for 
raising, receiving and collecting funds 
domestically and abroad through various 
illegal channels, including hawala, for funding 
separatists and terrorist activities in Jammu and 
Kashmir through the funds so collected and as 
such have entered into a larger criminal 
conspiracy for causing disruption in the 
Kashmir valley by way of pelting stones on the 
security forces, systematically burning of 
schools, damage to public property and waging 
war against India. Investigation revealed that 
various terrorist organizations viz. JKLF, HM, 
LeT, in connivance with various secessionist 
groups particularly the APHC/ Alurriyat 
Conference and its constituents funded by 
Pakistan and its agencies and terror groups 
have entered into a criminal conspiracy to 
wage war against the Government of India. The 
Hurriyat leaders and their supporters are 
following the ideology of secession of the State 
of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of 
India. Investigation revealed that All Parties 
Hurriyat Conference was formed as a 
conglomerate of 26 political/social/ religious 
organizations in 1993 to give a political mask 
to the secessionist activities. This alliance has 
been consistently promoted and supported by 
Pakistan to fulfill its evil motive and establish 
its claim over the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
The APHC calls itself a political front, 
whereas, their agenda is to create an 
atmosphere conducive to the fulfillment of 
their goal of secession of Jammu and Kashmir 
from the Union of India. 


The investigation has revealed that All Parties 
Hurriyat Conference (APHC) including JKNF 
had entered into a criminal conspiracy and 
engaged in instigating the general public of 
Kashmir for taking part in violent activities to 
make the atmosphere in valley such which may 
be helpful for propagating their secessionist 
agenda. APHC repeatedly asked the people to 
observe strikes on various non-existent issues 
and then incited and instigated them to get 
involved in unlawful activities such as stone- 
pelting, burning of public properties etc. The 
motive behind the disturbances caused by the 
frequent strikes and the stone-pelting incidents 
was to create such circumstances which will 
lead to the secession of the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the Union of India. In those 
incidents, several persons were killed, large 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEc. 3(4i)] 


number of civilian as well as security personnel 
were injured, and public properties including 
school were burnt. 


Enforcement 
Directorate, Delhi 
Zonal Office-II 


ECIR/03/DLZ- 
II/2017 dated 
14.06.2017 u/s 3 of 
PMLA 


NIA registered an FIR bearing no. RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI dated May 30. 05.2017 
under section 154 Cr.P.C. for the offences 
punishable under sections 120B, 121, 121A & 
124A IPC and u/s 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 
40 UAPA. The above case was registered by 
NIA based on the credible information 
received by the Central Government that Hafiz 
Muhammad Saeed, Amir of Jammat-ud- 
Dawah and the secessionist and separatist 
leaders including the members/cadres of 
Hurriyat Conference, have been acting in 
connivance with active militants of proscribed 
terrorist organizations viz. Hizb-ul- 
Mujahideen (HM), Dukhtaran-e-Millat, 
Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), and other terrorists 
organizations/ associations/ gangs for raising, 
receiving and collecting funds domestically 
and abroad through various illegal channels, 
including hawala, for funding separatists and 
terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir 
through the funds so collected and as such have 
entered into a larger criminal conspiracy for 
causing disruption in the Kashmir valley by 
way of pelting stones on the security forces, 
systematically burning of schools, damage to 
public property and waging war against India. 


ED initiated money laundering investigation in 
the instant case wherein 4 Provisional 
attachment Orders (PAO) amounting to Rs. 
9.314 crores have been issued. After 
investigation, main prosecution complaint in 
the case was filed on 24.08.2020. 


Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan & others 


P.S. Maisuma, 
Srinagar 


FIR no. 227/1987 
u/s 148, 149, 427, 
451, 353 RPC 


On 17.11.1987, a mob led by Nayeem Khan 
and others, while marching from Maisuma 
Bazar towards Gow-Kadal Srinagar and 
shouting slogans against the sovereignty and 
integrity of the country, pelted stones on 
Security Forces in which many police officials 
got injured 


Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan & others 


P.S. Sadar, Srinagar 


FIR no. 285/2003 
u/s 13 UA(P)A 


Information was received from reliable sources 
regarding suspicious movement in Hyderpora 
area of Srinagar. On this, a naka was 
established near petrol pump Hyderpora and 
two persons namely Nayeem Ahmad Khan and 
Abdul Qayoom Ganie were found roaming in 
suspicious manner. Upon their search, eight 
lakhs and ninety-eight thousand rupees were 
recovered from their possession. During 
questioning, they were not able to answer 


Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan and Abdul 
Qayoom Ganie 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] 


भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


queries regarding the money.However, 
Nayeem Ahmad Khan revealed that this money 
has been provided to them by ISI of Pakistan 
for furthering terrorist activities in Srinagar and 
for further distribution among terrorists. 


P.S. Kothibagh, 
Srinagar 


FIR no. 10/2014 


u/s 13 UA(P)A, and 
u/s 109 RPC 


A written docket was received by P/S 
Kothibagh from Ct. Javid Ahmad 333/S on 
behalf of SHO P.S. Kothibagh to the effect that 
during patrolling and law & order duty at Lal 
Rukh Hotel, Lal chowk, Hurriyat conference 
leaders comprising of Mushtaq-ul-Islam and 
others held a seminar at Hotel Lal Rukh who 
all, in their speech, said that India has illegally 
occupied Kashmir and harmed the people at 
their will of which the highest example is that 
of Mohd Magqbool Bhat and Mohd Afzal Guru 
who were brutally hanged and even their 
remains were not handed to their legal heirs. 
They also raised anti-national slogans like 
Pakistan Zindabad, we want freedom etc. 


Nayeem Khan and 
others 


P.S. Karan Nagar, 
Srinagar 


FIR no. 72/2011 
u/s 147 RPC, and u/s 


After Friday prayers in a mosque near Gole 
Market, Karan Nagar, Srinagar, Hurriyat 
activist Nayeem Ahmad Khan along with some 
companions started sloganeering against the 
country and in favour of Azaadi. They tried 
their best to provoke people against the 
integrity and sovereignty of the country. 


Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan & others 


13 UA(P)A 
P.S. Batmaloo, P/S received an information on 15.11.2009 | Mushtaq-Ul-Islam, 
Srinagar from the reliable sources to the effect that | Shabir Ahmad 
Chairman of Muslim League Mushtaq-UI- | Shah, Nayeem 
Islam along with other activists of Hurriyat | Ahmad Khan, 
namely Shabir Ahmad Shah, Nayeem Ahmad | Shakeel Bakhshi, 
FIR no. 108/2009, Khan, Shakeel Bakhshi, Zattar Akber Bhat, | Zaffar Akber Bhat. 
etc. are deliberately misguiding the general 
u/s 153-A RPC, and | public and preparing them to indulge 
u/s 13 UA(P)A themselves in the MHurriyat and make 
themselves anti national. On this information, 
FIR was registered. Investigation of the case 
has been concluded as challan against 07 
accused persons is pending production. 
P.S. Chadoora, SAS Geelani and other Hurriyat activists | Nayeem Ahmed 
Budgam including Nayeem Ahmed Khan gave a hartal | Khan & others 


FIR no. 207/2009 
u/s 13 UA(P)A 


call and entered in local Jamia Masjid, 
Chadoora and delivered hate speech against the 
Govt of J&K/India after Friday prayers. They 
also praised Pakistan and terrorists and tried to 
instigate people against the country. They also 
appealed the people to continue struggle for 
freedom. 


P.S. Budgam, 
Budgam 


Syed Ali Shah Geelani was placed under house 
arrest on June 11, 2014. SAS Geelani planned 
a commemoration ceremony at his residence 


a. SAS Geelani 


10 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEc. 3(4i)] 


FIR no. 110/2014 


u/s 147, 341, 353 
RPC and u/s 13 


for his martyred comrades. The co-accused and 
unidentified supporters helped Geelani to come 
out of house arrest and assembled/ gathered at 
Hyderpora chowk, raised slogans against 
integrity of India and stopped ongoing traffic. 


b. Shabir Ahmad 
Shah 


c. Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan 


UA(P)A d. Mohd. Akbar 
Khanday 
(APHC-G) 
e. Mohd. Amin 
f. Bashir Ahmad 
Bhat @Peer 
Saifullah 
10. | P.S. Magam, | The case pertains to anti-national speech | 1.Syed Ali Shah 
Budgam delivered by Hurriyat (G) leaders at Narbal on | Geelani 
April 20, 2015 while visiting the residence of 5 7४666 rr | 
deceased namely Suhail Ahmad Sofi s/o Abdul Ra ‘her 4 
FIR no. 36/2015 dt. | Ahad Sofi who was killed during a stone 
April 20, 2015 pelting incident. 3.Molvi Umar 
ws 147,148, 336,341 narod 
RPC, and uw/s 13 4.NayeemAhmad 
UA(P)A Khan 
5.Mohd. Yasin 
Malik 
11. | P.S. Magam, The case pertains to anti national speech | Shabir Ahmad 
Budgam delivered by Hurriyat leaders namely, Shabir | Shah s/o Gh. 
Ahmed Shah of JKDFP,Zaffer Akbar Bhat of | Rasool Shah, 
Salvation Mass Movement, Nayeem Ahmed 
FIR no. 39/2015 dt. Khan andAsiya Andrabi at Narbal on April 21, 
April 21, 2015 u/s 2015 while visiting the residence of deceased | ZafferAkber Bhat 
147, 148, 336, 341 namely Suhail Ahmad Sofi s/o Abdul Ahad | s/o Mohd. Akbar 
RPC and u/s 13 Sofi r/o Narbal who was killed during a stone | Bhat 
UA(P)A pelting incident, for offering condolence. 
Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan s/o Gh. 
Mohd. Khan 
Asiya Andrabi w/o 
Md. QasimFaqtoo 
12. | P.S. Magam, The case pertains to anti national speech/ | Farooq Ahmad 
Budgam slogans delivered by Hurriyat leaders namely | Rather s/o Ali 
Farooq Ahmed Rather s/o Ali Mohd. Rather, | Mohammad Rather 


FIR no. 40/2015 


u/s 147, 148, 336, 
341, 353 RPC and 
u/s 13 UA(P)A 


Mehraj-u-Din Kawal s/o Ghulam Ahmad Khan 
Sopori, Nayeem Ahmed Khan, Zahid Ali (Jel) 
at Narbal on April 24, 2015 while visiting the 
residence of deceased namely Suhail Ahmad 
Sofi s/o Abdul Ahad Sofi who was killed in a 
stone pelting incident, for offering condolence. 


Mehraj-ud-Din 
Kalwal s/o Ghulam 
Ahmad 


Nayeem Ahmad 
Khan s/o Gh. 
Mohd. Khan 


[भाग I—@re 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 11 
13. | P.S. Budgam, On 12.05.2016 MHurriyat activist namely | Nayeem Ahmad 
Budgam Nayeem Ahmad Khan and other Hurriyat | Khan & others 
activists stopped the vehicular movement on 
IG road near Hyderpora Chowk and attacked 
FIR no. 93/2016 u/s_| the police party. They also raised anti-national 
341, 353 RPC dt. slogans. 
May 12, 2016 
14. | P.S. Rajbagh, On 14-10-2004, a procession under the | Nayeem Ahmad 
Srinagar command of Nayeem Ahmad Khan pelted | Khan & others 
stones on police party resulting in injuries to 
some police officials and breakage of 
FIR no. 128/2004 dt. | windowpanes of some vehicles. 
14.10.2004 u/s 147, 
336, 332, 427 RPC 
15. | P.S. Hajin, On 07.03.2014 a reliable information was | Nayeem Ahmad 
Bandipore received that the accused person along with | Khan & others 
others had gathered the general public at main 
chowk Hajin and were provoking the general 
FIR no. 17/2014 dt. | public to boycott the elections and were also 
7.3.2014 chanting anti-India Slogans, thus causing threat 
u/s 132 PR Act, and to the oe and eee ee ane The 
accused persons were also chanting pro- 
Ua es Pakistan slogans. During the course of 
investigation, the accused persons were 
arrested and the charge sheet of the said FIR 
was filed before the Court on 17.02.2022. 
16. | P.S. Pattan, On 11-01-2000, Nayeem Ahmad Khan with | Nayeem Ahmad 
Baramulla other anti-national elements delivered anti- | Khan and others 
national speech at Pattan Market. He provoked 
the people against the Govt. and establishment, 
FIR no. 05/2000 besides instigating them to chant anti-national 
u/s13 UA(P)A, dt. slogans. Police tried to arrest him however, due 
11.01.2000 to huge public presence he took advantage and 
fled from the spot. 
17. | P.S. Pattan, On 09-09-11, after Friday prayers, a procession | Nayeem Ahmad 
Baramulla under the leadership of Nayeem Ahmed Khan | Khan 
came on road where Nayeem Ahmad Khan 
delivered a provocative speech at Pattan Bazar. 
FIR no. 228/2011 The crowd raised anti-India slogans and in 
u/s13 UA(P)A, dt. favour of freedom of Kashmir. 
9.9.2011 
18. | P.S. Shergrahi, Case pertains to anti-national sloganeering by | Nayeem Ahmad 
Srinagar the violent mob led by Nayeem Ahmed Khan | Khan & others 
and Javid Ahmed @ Nalka at old crossing 
Batmaloo, Srinagar. They raised anti-national 
FIR no. 341/1998 slogans, halted the flow of traffic and instigated 
u/s 188, 341, RPC, | the people for anti-national activities who 
and u/s 13 UA(P)A_ | indulged in stone pelting and damaged public 
property. 
19. | P.S. Nowhatta, The case pertains to anti-national speech | Nayeem Ahmad 
Srinagar delivered by Hurriyat (G) Chairman SAS | Khan & others 


Geelani, Farooq Ahmed Dar, Chairman 


12 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEC. 3(4i)] 


FIR no. 36/2015 u/s 
13 UA(P)A 


Hurriyat (M) Moulvi Umar Farooq, Nayeem 
Ahmed Khan and JKLF Chairman Mohd. 
Yasin Malik at Narbal on 20.04.2015 while 
visiting the residence of deceased namely 
Suhail Ahmed Sofi s/o Abdul Ahad Sofi for 
condolence purpose. 


20. | P.S. Bandipora, Hurriyat leader Nayeem Ahmed Khan and | Nayeem Ahmed 
Bandipora others came to Gulshan Chowk Bandipora and | Khan & others 
raised anti-national slogans/addressed the 
general public and provoked them against 
FIR no. 234/2009 sovereignty and integrity of India 
u/s 19 UA(P)A 
21. | P.S. Bandipora, On 13.11.2009, PS Bandipora received a | Nayeem Ahmed 
Bandipora docket from SI Shabir Ahmad to the effect that | Khan 
Hurriyat leader Nayeem Ahmed Khan 
appeared at Gulshan Chowk Bandipora and 
FIR no. 245/2009 raised anti-national slogans against the Union 
u/s 19 UA(P)A, dt. of India 
13.11.2009 
22. | P.S. Budgam, Anti-national speech was delivered by Hurriyat | Nayeem Ahmed 
Budgam (G) Chairman SAS Geelani, Farooq Ahmed | Khan & others 
Rather, Chairman Hurriyat (M) Moulvi Umar 
Faroog, Nayeem Ahmed Khan and JKLF 
FIR no. 274/ 2016 Chairman Md. Yasin Malik at Narbal on 
u/s 147, 120-B, 341 | 20.04.2015 while visiting the residence of 
RPC, and u/s 13 deceased namely Suhail Ahmed Sofi s/o Abdul 
UA(P)A, dt. Ahad Sofi for condolence purpose 
20.04.2015 
23. | P.S. Shergrahi, A mob led by SAS Geelani, Shabir Shah, Javid | Nayeem Ahmed 
Srinagar Mir, Yaqoob Wakil, Nayeem Khan and other | Khan & others 
were marching towards Jahangir Chowk 
holding dead body of militant Hilal Ahmed 
FIR no. 192/1996 Beigh of Allochibagh who was killed in an 
u/s 307, 341, 147, encounter with Security Forces at Parimpora, 
336, 132 RPC shouting anti-India slogans, and were stopped 
at Naaz crossing by Police.The mob started 
stone pelting and some unknown militant fired 
upon the police party and after aerial firing by 
police, mobwas disbursed. 
24. | P.S. Anantnag, Case pertains to provocation of people by | Nayeem Ahmed 
Anantnag Hurriyat leaders Shabir Shah, Aziz Sheikh, | Khan & others 
Nayeem Ahmed Khan for election boycott. 
FIR no. 198/2004 
u/s 132 of 
Representation of 
Peoples Act 
25. | P.S. Anantnag, On death anniversary of Dr. Qazi Nisar on | Nayeem Ahmed 
Anantnag 19.06.2012, mobs of different towns of | Khan & others 


FIR no. 197/2012 


Anantnag gathered at eid-gah, Anantnag. 
Hurriyat activists Nayeem Ahmed Khan, 
Shabir Shah and other participated. During 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 13 


u/s 147, 148, 149, their speeches they provoked the youth against 
336 152 RPC the integrity/sovereignty of the country. On 
reaching Lal Chowk, Anantnag in shape of a 
procession, the mob on the instance of Hurriyat 
activists raised anti national slogans and started 
heavy stone pelting on SFs/Police. 


26. | P.S. CIK, Srinagar During the investigation of FIR No. 15/91 it | Nayeem Ahmed 
came to light that secessionist leaders namely | Khan 

Shabir Ahmed Shah, Nayeem Khan and others 
FIR no. 10/2010 u/s_ | have amassed huge wealth and assets through 
13, 17, 18 UAPA, hawala channel. These individuals favouring 
and u/s 120-B, 121- | secessionism of J&K from the UOI through 
A RPC armed violence/secessionist ideology were 
utilizing this property to facilitate illegal 
funding to various terrorist outfits for carrying 
forward terrorist violence/secessionism of 
J&K from UOI. 


13. The Background Note further records that the above referred acts of the JKNF lead to the 
conclusion that this organization is bent upon to work towards secession and separation of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the Union of India. It has been continuously encouraging the armed insurgency aimed 
at causing disaffection, disloyalty, dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the 
lawful government in a manner prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Indian 
Union. Thus, the activities of JKNF fall within the purview of unlawful activities. 


Declaration Of JKNF As An Unlawful Association 


14. Keeping in view the gravity of the situation and unabated unlawful activities by the 
organization, the Central Government decided to declare Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF) as an 
unlawful association under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. 


15. Accordingly, Notification no. S.O. 1296(E) dated 12"March, 2024 declaring JKNF as an 
unlawful association was issued. Subsequent thereto, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Tribunal has 
been constituted vide Notification no. 5.0. 1628 (E) dated 5“April, 2024 to adjudicate upon the same. 


III. STATUTORY PROVISIONS 
16. Section 2 (०) and (p) of the UA(P)A, read as follows: 
“2. Definitions. — (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - 


(०) “unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or association, means any action taken by 
such individual or association (whether by committing an act or by words, either spoken or 
written, or by signs or by visible representation or otherwise), - 


(i) Which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground 
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or, the secession of a 
part of the territory of India from the Union, or which incites any individual or 
group of individuals to bring about such cession or secession; or 


(ii) Which disclaims, questions, disrupts, or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India; or 


(iii) Which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India; 
ce * . 33 . . 
(p) “unlawful association” means any association, - 


(i) which has for its object any unlawful activity, or which encourages or aids 
persons to undertake any unlawful activity, or of which the members undertake 
such activity; or 


14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


(ii) which has for its object any activity which is punishable under Section 153-A or 
Section 153-B of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), or which encourages or 
aids persons to undertake any such activity, or of which the members undertake 
any such activity: 


Provided that nothing contained in sub-clause (ii), shall apply to the State of Jammu 
and Kashmir”. 


17. Section 2(0) of the Act defines ‘unlawful activity’. It means “any action taken” by an 
association or an individual of the kind mentioned in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of the said sub-section. 
Any action taken has reference to and must be of the kind stipulated in and covered by clauses (1), (ii) 
or (iii). Action can be either written or spoken, by sign or by visible representation or even otherwise. 
Clause (i) refers to “action taken” with the intent or which supports any claim for secession or cession 
of any part of India or incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about secession or cession. 
Clause (ii) refers to “action taken” which has the effect of disclaiming, questioning, disrupting or 
intending to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India. Clause (iii) refers to “action taken” 
which causes or is intended to cause disaffection against India. 


18. Unlawful association has been defined in Section 2(p) of the Act and consists of two parts: (1) 
and (ii). Part (1) refers to the unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) and encompasses associations 
which have the object that encourage or even aid persons to undertake the said activity. The last part 
of Part (i) widens the definition of the term “unlawful association” to include an association of which 
members undertake unlawful activity. In a way, therefore, the association is vicariously liable and can 
be regarded as an unlawful association if members of an association undertake unlawful activity. 


19. Section 2(p)(ii) does not refer to unlawful activity defined in Section 2(0) of the Act but refers 
to Sections 153A and 153B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC for short). An association which 
encourages or aids or the object of which is to encourage or aid persons to undertake activities 
punishable under Section 153A or 1538 is an unlawful association. “Object” for which an association 
is formed can in many cases be in writing but encouragement and aid to persons to undertake activities 
under Sections 153A and 1538 may be oral or in writing. The last part of Section 2(p)(ii) widens and 
expands the scope of the term “unlawful association”, when it stipulates that an association of which 
members undertake activities which are punishable under Section 153A or 153B of the IPC is an 
unlawful association. An association, therefore, can become an unlawful association if its members 
undertake any activity covered by Section 153A or 153B of the IPC. 


IV. NATURE AND SCOPE OF PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 


20. The nature of the proceedings before this Tribunal and the scope of inquiry in the present 
proceedings have been laid down by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind vs. Union of India 
(1995) 1 SCC 428 in the specific context of the provisions of the UA(P)A, 1967. The proceedings before 
this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard of proof is the standard prescribed by the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-IslamiHind(supra). This lishas to be decided by objectively examining 
which version 1.6. of the Central Govt. or that of the concerned organization, is more acceptable and 
credible. In this regard, reference may be made to following observations in Jamaat-e-Islami 
Hind(supra): 


“30. The allegations made by the Central Government against the Association - Jamaat-E- 
Islami Hind - were totally denied. It was, therefore, necessary that the Tribunal should have 
adjudicated the controversy in the manner indicated. Shri Soli J. Sorabjee, learned counsel for 
the Association, Jamaat-E-Islami Hind, contended that apart from the allegations made being 
not proved, in law such acts even if proved, do not constitute "unlawful activity" within the 
meaning of that expression defined in the Act. In the present case, the alternative submission 
of Shri Sorabjee does not arise for consideration on the view we are taking on his first 
submission. The only material produced by the Central Government to support the notification 
issued by it under Section 3(1) of the Act, apart from a resume based on certain intelligence 
reports, are the statements of Shri T.N. Srivastava, Joint Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs 
and Shri N.C. Padhi, Joint Director, IB. Neither Shri Srivastava nor Shri Padhi has deposed to 
any fact on the basis of personal knowledge. Their entire version is based on official record. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 15 


21. 


The resume is based on intelligence reports submitted by persons whose names have not been 
disclosed on the ground of confidentiality. In other words, no person has deposed from personal 
knowledge whose veracity could be tested by cross-examination. Assuming that it was not in 
public interest to disclose the identity of those persons or to produce them for cross- 
examination by the other side, some method should have been adopted by the Tribunal to test 
the credibility of their version. The Tribunal did not require production of those persons before 
it, even in camera, to question them and test the credibility of their version. On the other hand, 
the persons to whom the alleged unlawful acts of the Association are attributed filed their 
affidavits denying the allegations and also deposed as witnesses to rebut these allegations. In 
such a situation, the Tribunal had no means by which it could decide objectively, which of the 
two conflicting versions to accept as credible. There was thus no objective determination of the 
factual basis for the notification to amount to adjudication by the Tribunal, contemplated by 
the statute. The Tribunal has merely proceeded to accept the version of the Central Government 
without taking care to know even itself the source from which it came or to assess credibility of 
the version sufficient to inspire confidence justifying its acceptance in preference to the sworn 
denial of the witnesses examined by the other side. Obviously, the Tribunal did not properly 
appreciate and fully comprehend its role in the scheme of the statute and the nature of 
adjudication required to be made by it. The order of the Tribunal cannot, therefore, be 
sustained." 


The present Tribunal constituted under the UA(P)A has been vested with certain powers and 


the procedure to be adopted by it, under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the said Act, which are 
reproduced as under: 


“5. Tribunal. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute, as and when necessary, a tribunal to be known as the "Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Tribunal" consisting of one person, to be appointed by the Central Government: 
Provided that no person shall be so appointed unless he is a Judge of a High Court. 


(2) If, for any reason, a vacancy (other than a temporary absence) occurs in the office of the 
presiding officer of the Tribunal, then, the Central Government shall appoint another 
person in accordance with the provisions of this section to fill the vacancy and the 
proceedings may be continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is 
filled. 


(3) The Central Government shall make available to the Tribunal such staff as may be 
necessary for the discharge of its functions under this Act. 


(4) All expenses incurred in connection with the Tribunal shall be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India. 


(5) Subject to the provisions of section 9, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own 
procedure in all matters arising out of the discharge of its functions including the place 
or places at which it will hold its sittings. 


(6) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of making an inquiry under this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: 


(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness 
and examining him on oath; 


(b) the discovery and production of any document or other 
material object producible as evidence; 


(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; 
(d) the requisitioning of any public record from any court or 
office; 


(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of 


16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


witnesses. 


(7) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 (5 of 1898).”’ 


“9, Procedure to be followed in the disposal of applications under this Act.—Subject to any 
rules that may be made under this Act, the procedure to be followed by the Tribunal in holding 
any inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or by a Court of the District Judge in disposing 
of any application under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8 shall, so far 
as may be, be the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for 
the investigation of claims and the decision of the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, 
as the case may be, shall be final.” 


22. Further, under Section 4(1) of Act, the Central Government refers the notification (issued under 
Section 3(1) of the Act) to the Tribunal for “adjudicating” whether or not there is “sufficient cause” for 
declaring the association unlawful. Section 4(2) requires issuance of notice on the association affected 
to show cause as to why the association should not be declared as unlawful. Section 4(3) mandates an 
inquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 after calling for such information as may be necessary from 
Central Government or from office bearers or members of the association. The Tribunal under Section 
4(3) is required to adjudicate and make an order, as it may deem fit, either confirming the declaration 
made in the notification or cancelling the same. After interpreting the said provisions of the UA(P)A in 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), it was held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court as under: 


“11.... The entire procedure contemplates an objective determination made on the basis of 
material placed before the Tribunal by the two sides; and the inquiry is in the nature of 
adjudication of a lis between two parties, the outcome of which depends on the weight of the 
material produced by them. Credibility of the material should, ordinarily, be capable of 
objective assessment. The decision to be made by the Tribunal is “whether or not there is 
sufficient cause for declaring the Association unlawful”. Such a determination requires the 
Tribunal to reach the conclusion that the material to support the declaration outweighs the 
material against it and the additional weight to support the declaration is sufficient to sustain 
it. The test of greater probability appears to be the pragmatic test applicable in the context.” 


23. On the question of confidential information that is sought to be withheld, the Hon’ble Supreme 
Court emphasized that the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing credibility of 
the information and the Tribunal should satisfy itself whether it can safely rely upon it. This was 
necessary as in certain situations, source of information or disclosure of full particulars may be against 
public interest. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of information and its source 
in public interest enables the Tribunal to test the credibility of confidential information for objectively 
deciding the Reference. It was emphasized that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often 
be clandestine in nature and, therefore, material or information for various reasons may require 
confidentiality. Disclosure, it was held, can jeopardize criminal cases pending investigation and trial. 


24. On the question of nature and type of evidence which can be relied upon by the Tribunal, the 
Hon’ble Supreme Court referred to Rule 3 of UA(P) Rules, 1968. Rule 3(1) stipulates that the Tribunal, 
subject to sub-rule (2), shall follow “as far as practicable’, the rules of evidence laid down in Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (‘Evidence Act’, here-in after). In this regard, reference can be made to the following 
observations in Jamaat-e-IslamiHind(supra): 


“22. ...The materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a 
procedure would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points 
in controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without 
abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a 
course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the 
circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, 
without jeopardizing the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of 
adjudication is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 17 


25. 


is reached by it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of 
the opinion already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer [408 US 471: 33 L Ed 2d 484 
(1972)] the United States Supreme Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum 
requirements to be followed, as under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They 
include (a) written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the 
parolee of evidence against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present 
witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine 
adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not 
allowing confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a 
traditional parole board, members of which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; 
and (f) a written statement by the fact-finders as to the evidence relied on and reasons 
for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no thought to equate this second stage of 
parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the 
process should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and 
other material that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial.”’. 


XXX XXX XXX 


26. ......The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, after a show-cause notice, of 
existence of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must necessarily imply and import into 
the inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural justice to ensure that the decision of the 
Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available material, and not a mere imprimatur 
of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a 
fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a 
given case, would depend on the materials constituting the factual foundation of the notification 
and the manner in which the Tribunal can assess its true worth. This has to be determined by 
the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural 
justice, the fact that the materials in such matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict 
sense, and that the scrutiny is not a criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all 
the points in controversy after assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, 
even though it may not be disclosed to the association, if the public interest so requires.” 


Before assessing the credibility of material and analyzing evidence adduced, it is apposite to 


take note of sections 25, 26 and 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, as well as sections 161 and 162 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The same are reproduced hereunder: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


25. Confession to police-officer not to be proved.—No confession made to a police-officer, shall 
be proved as against a person accused of any offence. 


26. Confession by accused while in custody of police not to be proved against him.—No 
confession made by any person whilst he is in the custody of a police-officer, unless it be made 
in the immediate presence of a Magistrate, shall be proved as against such person. 


Explanation.—In this section “Magistrate” does not include the head of a village discharging 
magisterial functions in the Presidency of Fort St. George *** or elsewhere, unless such 
headman is a Magistrate exercising the powers of a Magistrate under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1882 (10 of 1882). 


27. How much of information received from accused may be proved.—Provided that, when any 
fact is deposed to as discovered inconsequence of information received from a person accused 
of any offence, in the custody of a police-officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts 
to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved. 


Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


“161. Examination of witnesses by police —(1) Any police officer making an investigation under 
this Chapter, or any police officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by general 
or special order, prescribe in this behalf, acting on the requisition of such officer, may examine 
orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. 


(2) Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by 
such officer, other than questions the answers to which would have a tendency to expose him 
to a criminal charge or to a penalty or forfeiture. 


(3) The police officer may reduce into writing any statement made to him in the course of an 
examination under this section; and if he does so, he shall make a separate and true record 
of the statement of each such person whose statement he records. 


Provided that statement made under this sub-section may also be recorded by audio- 
video electronic means: 


Provided further that the statement of a woman against whom an offence under section 
354, section 354A, section 354B, section 354C, section 354D, section 376, 3 section 376A, section 
376AB, section 376B, section 376C, section 376D, section 376DA, section 376DB ], section 376E 
or section 509 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) is alleged to have been committed or 
attempted shall be recorded, by a woman police officer or any woman officer. 


162. Statements to police not to be signed: Use of statements in evidence.—(1) No statement 
made by any person to a police officer in the course of an investigation under this Chapter, shall, 
if reduced to writing, be signed by the person making it; nor shall any such statement or any 
record thereof, whether in a police diary or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, 
be used for any purpose, save as hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any 
offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial 
whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, if duly 
proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the Court, by the prosecution, to 
contradict such witness in the manner provided by section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 
(1 of 1872); and when any part of such statement is so used, any part thereof may also be used 
in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred 
to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the provisions 
of clause (1) of section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872); or to affect the 
provisions of section 27 of that Act. 


Explanation.—An omission to state a fact or circumstance in the statement referred to 
in sub-section (1) may amount to contradiction if the same appears to be significant and 
otherwise relevant having regard to the context in which such omission occurs and whether any 
omission amounts to a contradiction in the particular context shall be a question of fact.” 


26. As per sections 25 and 26 of the Evidence Act, confessions made to a police officer or while in 
custody shall not be proved against a person accused of any offense during the trial of that offense. As 
per Section 162 of the Cr.P.C., no statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under Chapter XII (which includes Section 161 Cr.P.C.) can be used, at any inquiry or 
trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. However, 
these sections do not prohibit the use of such statements in proceedings where the accused is not being 
tried for the specific offense in question, or in civil proceedings or ancillary proceedings. 


27. The Supreme Court in Mahesh Kumar v. State of Rajasthan, 1990 Supp SCC 541 (2), noted the 
possible use of statement made to the police by the accused persons for being use of as evidence against 
the accused in an “enquiry” although inadmissible as evidence against them at the trial for the offence 
with which they were charged. Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. In Queen Empress v. Tribhovan Manekchand, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court 
laid down that the statement made to the police by the accused persons as to the ownership of 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 19 


28. 


property which was the subject matter of the proceedings against them although inadmissible 
as evidence against them at the trial for the offence with which they were charged, were 
admissible as evidence with regard to the ownership of the property in an enquiry held by the 
Criminal Procedure Code. The same view was reiterated in Pohlu v. Emperor where it was 
pointed out that though there is a bar in Section 25 of the Evidence Act, or in Section 162 CrPC 
for being made use of as evidence against the accused, this statement could be made use of in 
an enquiry under Section 517 CrPC when determining the question of return of property. These 
two decisions have been followed by the Rajasthan High Court in Dhanraj 
Baldeokishan v. Stateand the Mysore High Court in Veerabhadrappa v. Govinda.” 


The Supreme Court in Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar, (1981) 2 SCC 493 with reference to the 


bar under Section 162 of the Cr.P.C against use in evidence of a statement made before a police officer 
in the course of investigation, held that the same would not apply where court calls for such statement 
in a civil proceeding provided the statement is otherwise relevant under the Evidence Act, 1872. 
Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“3. Before we refer to the provisions of Sections 162 and 172 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 
it would be convenient to set out briefly a few relevant provisions of that Code. Section 2 is the 
definition section and clause (g) of that section defines “inquiry” to mean “every inquiry, other 
than a trial conducted under this Code by a Magistrate or court”. Clause (a) of Section 2 gives 
the definition of “investigation” and it says that investigation includes “all the proceedings 
under this Code for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or by any person 
(other than a Magistrate) who is authorised by a Magistrate in this behalf”. Section 4 provides: 


“4. (1) All offences under the Penal Code, 1860 shall be investigated, inquired into, 
tried, and otherwise dealt with according to the provisions hereinafter contained. 


(2) All offences under any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried, and 
otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but subject to any enactment 
for the time being in force regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring 
into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.” 


It is apparent from this section that the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code are 
applicable where an offence under the Penal Code, 1860 or under any other law is being 
investigated, inquired into, tried or otherwise dealt with. Then we come straight to Section 162 
which occurs in Chapter XII dealing with the powers of the police to investigate into offences. 
That section, so far as material, reads as under: 


“162. (1) No statement made by any person to a police officer in the course of an 
investigation under this Chapter, shall, if reduced to writing, be signed by the person 
making it; nor shall any such statement or any record thereof, whether in a police diary 
or otherwise, or any part of such statement or record, be used for any purpose, save as 
hereinafter provided, at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under 
investigation at the time when such statement was made: 


Provided that when any witness is called for the prosecution in such inquiry or trial 
whose statement has been reduced into writing as aforesaid, any part of his statement, 
if duly proved, may be used by the accused, and with the permission of the court, by the 
prosecution, to contradict such witness in the manner provided by Section 145 of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872; and when any part of such statement is so used, any part 
thereof may also be used in the re-examination of such witness, but for the purpose 
only of explaining any matter referred to in his cross-examination. 


(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any statement falling within the 
provisions of clause (1) of Section 32 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, or to affect the 
provisions of Section 27 of that Act.” 


It bars the use of any statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation 
under Chapter XII, whether recorded in a police diary or otherwise, but, by the express terms 
of the section, this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any 


20 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement 
was made”. If the statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under 
Chapter XII is sought to be used in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial or even at an 
inquiry or trial but in respect of an offence other than that which was under investigation at the 

time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 162 would not be attracted. This section 
has been enacted for the benefit of the accused, as pointed out by this Court in Tahsildar 
Singh v. State of U.P. It is intended “to protect the accused against the user of statements of 
witnesses made before the police during investigation, at the trial presumably on the 

assumption that the said statements were not made under circumstances inspiring confidence ”’. 

This Court, in Tahsildar Singh case approved the following observations of Braund, J. 

in Emperor v. Aftab Mohd. Khan: 


“As it seems to us it is to protect accused persons from being prejudiced by statements 
made to police officers who by reason of the fact that an investigation is known to be 
on foot at the time the statement is made, may be in a position to influence the maker 
of it, and, on the other hand, to protect accused persons from the prejudice at the hands 
of persons who in the knowledge that an investigation has already started, are prepared 
to tell untruths”’ 


and expressed its agreement with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Nagpur High 
Court in BaliramTikaram Marathe v. Emperorthat “the object of the section is to protect the 
accused both against overzealous police officers and untruthful witnesses”. Protection against 
the use of statement made before the police during investigation is, therefore, granted to the 
accused by providing that such statement shall not be allowed to be used except for the limited 
purpose set out in the proviso to the section, at any inquiry or trial in respect of the offence 
which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made. But, this protection 
is unnecessary in any proceeding other than an inquiry or trial in respect of the offence under 
investigation and hence the bar created by the section is a limited bar. It has no application, 
for example in a civil proceeding or in a _ proceeding under Article 32 or 226 of 
the Constitution and a statement made before a police officer in the course of investigation can 
be used as evidence in such proceeding, provided it is otherwise relevant under the Indian 
Evidence Act. There are a number of decisions of various High Courts which have takenthis 
view and amongst them may be mentioned the decision of Jaganmohan Reddy, J. in Malakala 
Surya Raov.G. Janakamma. The present proceeding before us is a writ petition under 
Article 32 of the Constitution filed by the petitioners for enforcing their Fundamental Rights 
under Article 21 and it is neither an “inquiry” nora “trial” in respect of any offence and hence 
it is difficult to see how Section 162 can be invoked by the State in the present case. The 
procedure to be followed in a writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution is prescribed in 
Order XXXV of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966, and sub-rule (9) of Rule 10 lays down that at 
the hearing of the rule nisi, if the court is of the opinion that an opportunity be given to the 
parties to establish their respective cases by leading further evidence, the court may take such 
evidence or cause such evidence to be taken in such manner as it may deem fit and proper and 
obviously the reception of such evidence will be governed by the provisions of the Indian 
Evidence Act. It is obvious, therefore, that even a statement made before, a police officer during 
investigation can be produced and used in evidence in a writ petition under Article 32 provided 
it is relevant under the Indian Evidence Act and Section 162 cannot be urged as a bar against 
its production or use. The reports submitted by Shri L.V. Singh setting forth the result of his 
investigation cannot, in the circumstances, be shut out from being produced and considered in 
evidence under Section 162, even if they refer to any statements made before him and his 
associates during investigation, provided they are otherwise relevant under some provision of 
the Indian Evidence Act.” 


29. With reference to police diaries and Section 172 of the Cr.P.C., the Hon’ble Supreme Court in 
Khatri (supra) held as under: 


“.. These reports are clearly relevant under Section 35 of the Indian Evidence Act which reads 
as follows: 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 21 


“35. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record, stating a fact in 
issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official duty, 
or by any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by the law of the 
country in which such book, register or record is kept, is itself a relevant fact.” 


These reports are part of official record and they relate to the fact in issue as to how, and by 
whom the twenty-four under-trial prisoners were blinded and they are admittedly made by Sh 
L.V. Singh, a public servant, in the discharge of his official duty and hence they are plainly and 
indubitably covered by Section 35. The language of Section 35 is so clear that it is not necessary 
to refer to any decided cases on the interpretation of that section, but we may cite two decisions 
to illustrate the applicability of this section in the present case. The first is the decision of this 
Court in Kanwar Lal Gupta v. Amar Nath Chawla. There the question was whether reports 
made by officers of the CID (Special Branch) relating to public meetings covered by them at 
the time of the election were relevant under Section 35 and this Court held that they were, on 
the ground that they were (SCC p. 667) “made by public servants in discharge of their official 
duty and they were relevant under the first part of Section 35 of the Evidence Act, since they 
contained statements showing what were the public meetings held by the first respondent”. This 
Court in fact followed an earlier decision of the Court in P.C.P. Reddiar v. S. Perumal. So also 
in Jagdat v. Sheopal, Wazirhasan, J. held that the result of an inquiry by a Kanungo under 
Section 202 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898 embodied in the report is an entry in a 
public record stating a fact in issue and made by a public servant in the discharge of his official 
duties and the report is therefore admissible in evidence under Section 35. We find that a similar 
view was taken by a Division Bench of the Nagpur High Court in Chandulal v. Pushkar 
Rajwhere the learned Judges held that reports made by Revenue Officers, though not regarded 
as having judicial authority, where they express opinions on the private rights of the parties 
are relevant under Section 35 as reports made by public officers in the discharge of their official 
duties, insofar as they supply information of official proceedings and historical facts. The 
Calcutta High Court also held in Lionell Edwards Limited v. State of W.B. that official 
correspondence from the Forest Officer to his superior, the Conservator of Forests, carried on 
by the Forest Officer in the discharge of his official duty would be admissible in evidence under 
Section 35. There is therefore no doubt in our mind that the reports made by Sh L.V. Singh 
setting forth the result of the investigation carried on by him and his associates are clearly 
relevant under Section 35 since they relate to a fact in issue and are made by a public servant 
in the discharge of his official duty. It is indeed difficult to see how in a writ petition against 
the State Government where the complaint is that the police officials of the State Government 
blinded the petitioners at the time of arrest or whilst in police custody, the State Government 
can resist production of a report in regard to the truth or otherwise of the complaint, made by 
a highly placed officer pursuant to the direction issued by the State Government. We are clearly 
of the view that the reports made by Shri L.V. Singh as a result of the investigation carried out 
by him and his associates are relevant under Section 35 and they are liable to be produced by 
the State Government and used in evidence in the present writ petition. Of course, what 
evidentiary value must attach to the statements contained in these reports is a matter which 
would have to be decided by the court after considering these reports. It may ultimately be 
found that these reports have not much evidentiary value and even if they contain any 
statements adverse to the State Government, it may be possible for the State Government to 
dispute their correctness or to explain them away, but it cannot be said that these reports are 
not relevant. These reports must therefore be produced by the State and taken on record of the 
present writ petition. We may point out that though in our order dated February 16, 1981 we 
have referred to these reports as having been made by Shri L.V. Singh and his associates 
between January 10 and January 20, 1981 it seems that there has been some error on our part 
in mentioning the outer date as January 20, 1981 for we find that some of these reports were 
submitted by Shri L.V. Singh even after January 20, 1981 and the last of them was submitted 
on January 27, 1981, All these reports including the report submitted on December 9, 1980 
must therefore be filed by the State and taken as forming part of the record to be considered by 
the court in deciding the question at issue between the parties.” 


22 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


30. The Supreme Court in Vinay D. Nagar v. State of Rajasthan, (2008) 5 SCC 597, again held 
that bar of Section 162 of the Cr.P.C. is with regard to the admissibility of the statement recorded of a 
person by the police officer under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and by virtue of Section 162 Cr.P.C. would be 
applicable only where such statement is sought to be used at any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence 
under investigation at the time when such statement was made. The relevant extract of the said decision 
is as under: 


“14. On account of Section 162 CrPC, a statement made by any person to a police officer in 
the course of investigation under Chapter XII, if reduced into writing, will not be signed by the 
person making it, nor such statement recorded or any part thereof be used for any purpose at 
any inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement 
was made. Such statement may be used by an accused and with the permission of the court by 
the prosecution to contradict the witness whose statement was recorded by the police in the 
manner provided under Section 145 of the Evidence Act and can also be used for re- 
examination of such witness for the purpose only of explaining any matter referred to in his 
cross-examination. Bar of Section 162 CrPC of proving the statement recorded by the police 
officer of any person during investigation however shall not apply to any statement falling 
within the provision of Clause (1) of Section 32 of the Evidence Act, nor shall it affect Section 
27 of the Evidence Act. Bar of Section 162 CrPC is in regard to the admissibility of the 
statement recorded of a person by the police officer under Section 161 CrPC and by virtue of 
Section 162 CrPC would be applicable only where such statement is sought to be used at any 
inquiry or trial in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement 
was made. 


15. In Khatri (IV) v. State of Bihar this Court has held that Section 162 CrPC bars the use of 
any statement made before the police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter 
XII, whether recorded in the police diary or otherwise. However, by the express terms of Section 
162, this bar is applicable only where such statement is sought to be used “at any inquiry or 
trial” in respect of any offence under investigation at the time when such statement was made. 
If the statement made before a police officer in the course of an investigation under Chapter 
XII is sought to be used in any proceeding, inquiry or trial in respect of an offence other than 
which was under investigation at the time when such statement was made, the bar of Section 
162 will not be attracted.” 


31. After examining the aforementioned provisions, as well as the legal principles established in a 
catena of judgments, and considering that the inquiry before this Tribunal does not entail adjudicating 
the guilt of the accused but rather assessing the adequacy of material before the Central Government to 
designate JKNFas an ‘unlawful association’, the statements of witnesses recorded by the police officers, 
the statements made by the accused before police officers, along with the lists of items seized and 
seizure memos, are deemed admissible before this Tribunal. They can be utilized to ascertain the 
sufficiency of material before the Central Government for making the declaration under Section 3(1) of 
UA(P)A. 


V. PROCEDURE FOLLOWED BY THIS TRIBUNAL 


32: Consequently, upon due consideration of the aforesaid Notification no. 1296 (E) dt.12"March, 
2024 and Notification no. 1628(E) dt.5“April, 2024, this Tribunal held a preliminary hearing on 
16.04.2024, whereupon on a consideration of the material placed on record by the Central Government, 
notice under Section 4(2) of the Act was issued to the JKNF and its leaders/activists/members to show 
cause, within a period of 30 days, as to why JKNF ought not to be declared an unlawful association. 
The notice issued was given due publicity as is required under Section 3(4) of the Act. 


33. The Gazette Notification dated 12.03.2024 was also published in two National Newspapers (all 
India Edition), out of which one was in English while the other was in Hindi. The said notification was 
also published in two local newspapers one of which was in vernacular language and the other in 
English, both having wide circulation in the Jammu &Kashmir where the activities of the JKNF were 
or are believed to be ordinarily carried out. The method of affixation and proclamation by beating of 
drums, as well as loudspeakers, was also adopted. Proclamation was made at the last known addresses 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 23 


of the JKNF along with all of its leaders, members and front organization as well as that of its principal 
office bearers. 


34. The notice issued by the Tribunal along with the Gazette Notification dated 12.03.2024 was 
displayed on the notice board of the Deputy Commissioner/ District Magistrate/ Tehsildar in all the 
district headquarters of Kashmir zone where the activities of the association were or are believed to be 
ordinarily carried on. Help of All-India Radio and electronic media were also taken. Announcements 
were made through radio/electronic media at prime time. 


35. Apart from the above, notice was also issued to the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
through its Chief Secretary. 


36. The Registrar attached to the Tribunal was directed to ensure the compliance of the service of 
notice issued to the JKNF, its leaders and its office bearers in the manner indicated. The Registrar was 
directed to file an independent report in that behalf before the next date of hearing i.e. 20.05.2024. 


37. Accordingly, the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir filed its affidavit of service, affirming 
that service had been effected as directed by the Tribunal. The Registrar, vide his report dated 
18.05.2024, also confirmed service of notice issued by the Tribunal. 


38. This Tribunal having satisfied itself that service of statutory Notice had been effected on JKNF 
/its leaders/ its offices as per the directions contained in the order dated 16.04.2024, proceeded further 
with the inquiry. On the next hearing which was scheduled for 20.05.2024, no appearance was put in 
on behalf of JKNF and resultantly, the Tribunal was constrained to proceed ahead with its inquiry in 
regard to JKNF. Further, on behalf of Union of India, more time was sought to file affidavits and 
relevant documents in support of the notification declaring the JKNF as an unlawful association. 


39. In order to afford an opportunity to both the Central Govt. and the Union Territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir to lead evidence in support of the grounds set out in the Notification dated 12.03.2024, as 
also to give another opportunity to JKNF to rebut the material placed on record by the Central Govt. 
and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, by the same order 1.e. order dated 20.05.2024, further 
proceedings for recording of evidence were fixed on 20.06.2024, 21.06.24 and 24.06.2024 at Srinagar 
with due consent of the counsels appearing for the UOI, and the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. 
Accordingly, a public notice was issued for the hearings to be held at Srinagar on the aforesaid dates. 
However, prior to the hearings scheduled at Srinagar, this Tribunal also fixed a prior hearing in the High 
Court of Delhi on 05.06.2024 for directions. 


40. On 05.06.2024, more time was sought on behalf of Union of India/ Central Govt. for filing the 
affidavits in evidence in support of the Notification of declaration dt. 12.03.2024. Consequently, this 
Tribunal further adjourned the proceedings for 13.06.2024 and permitted the filing of affidavit/s on 
behalf of the Union of India by 13.06.2024. Direction was also given to file a list of witnesses. 


41. On 13.06.2024, it was submitted on behalf of the Union of India and UT of J&K that of the 
witnesses mentioned in the list of witnesses furnished with the Registrar of the Tribunal, 6 affidavits in 
evidence of J&K police officers shall be filed by 15.06.2024. Accordingly, the Tribunal directed the 
next proceeding to be held at Srinagar, as already scheduled, in the premises of the High Court of Jammu 
& Kashmir and Ladakh. 


42. On 20.06.2024, statements of the following witnesses on behalf of the Union of India were 
recorded at Srinagar: 
S. | Name of Witness Details of Affidavit | Affidavits kept in File no. 
No. along with date 
1. Sh. Kuldeep Raj, Ex. PW-1/A-1 dated | File no. - Vol. IV 
11.06.2024 


D.S.P, HQ, Anantnag, Kashmir 


Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 10; and exhibits from 
page nos. 11 to 37 


24 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY 


[PART II—SEc. 3(4i)] 


2. Sh. Saqib Gani, Ex. PW-2/B dated File no. — Vol. 1४ 
D.S.P, HQ, Budgam, Kashmir 13.06.2024 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 10; and exhibits from 
page nos. 11 to 34 
3. Sh. Rameez Rashid Bhat, Ex. PW-3/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
D.S.P, P.S. Hajin, Bandipora, FY.00;2074 
Kash Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 8; and exhibits from page 
nos. 9 to 26 
4. Sh. Aftab Awan, Ex. PW-4/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
S.D.P.0, Magam, Kashmir 13.06.2024 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 12; and exhibits from 
page nos. 13 to 59 
On 21.6.2024, following witnesses on behalf of the UOI were also examined: 
Ss. Name of Witness Details of Affidavit Affidavits kept in File no. 
No. along with date 
5. Sh. Mohd. Ashrif, SDPO, Ex. PW-5/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
Saddar, Srinagar 13.06.2024 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 7; and exhibits from page 
nos. 8 to 24 
i Sh. Vikram Nag, Sub — Ex. PW-6/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
Divisional Police Officer, 13.06.2024 
Shaheedganj, Kashmir 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 12; and exhibits from 
page nos. 13 to 56 
7. Sh. Hariprasad, Ex. PW-7/A dated File no. — Vol. 1४ 
S.D.P.O,Kothibagh, Srinagar tea 
Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 8; and exhibits from page 
nos. 9 to 19 
On 24.6.2024, following further witnesses were examined at Srinagar on behalf of the UOT: 
TA. Sh. Owais Ahmed, Ex. PW-7/A-1 dated File no. — Vol. IV 


S.D.P.O,Charar-e-sharif, 
Budgam, Kashmir 


13.06.2024 


Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 8; and exhibits from page 
nos. 9 to 25 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 25 


है Sh. Murtaza Ahmed Peer, Ex. PW-8/A dated File no. — Vol. IV 
Dy.S.P, CIK, Srinagar 22.06.2024 


Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 8; and exhibits from page 
nos. 9 to 15 


43. On 24.7.2024, this Tribunal directed that further proceedings shall be held at Delhi, in the High 
Court on 3.7.2024.On 3.7.2024, following witness was examined in the High Court of Delhi: 


i Sh. B.B. Pathak, Ex. PW-9/A dated | File no.— Vol. IV- A 
D.S.P, NIA, Delhi 1.07.2024 


Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 16; and exhibits from 
page nos. 17 to 806, along 
with statements of protected 
witnesses in a sealed cover 


On 3.7.2024 ld. Counsel for the UOI informed the Court that another affidavit in evidence of an official 
from the Ministry of Home Affairs, GOI has also been filed with the Registrar of the Tribunal. The 
proceedings were thereafter adjourned further to 15.7.2024. 


On 15.7.2024, the final witness on behalf UOI was examined in the High Court of Delhi: 
10. | Sh. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, Ex. PW-10/A dated File no. — Vol. [IV 
Director, CT, MHA, UOI 1.07,2024 


Affidavit from page nos. 1 
to 7; and exhibits from page 
nos. 8 to 35, along with 
documents/confidential 
material in a sealed cover 


The Witness Mr. Rajesh Kumar Gupta claimed privilege on behalf of Union of India in respect of the 
documents/confidential material supplied in a sealed cover. Subject to the outcome of claim of privilege, 
the sealed cover was taken on record. Since no other witness was to be examined on behalf of the UOI 
and there was no opposition to the Reference proceedings on behalf of JKNF, on 15.07.2024, the matter 
was posted for addressing final submissions on 27.07.2024. 


44. It needs a highlight that for the Tribunal’s proceedings at Srinagar, Union of India was directed 
to ensure that any interested party who desires to appear physically before the Tribunal on 20.06.2024, 
21.06.2024 and 24.06.2024, should be duly assisted for the said purpose. For the said purpose, ASI 
Mohd. Niyaz, ARP: Q51324/XI-SEC was deputed for all three dates of hearing at Srinagar, in the High 
Court premises, for facilitating the appearance of any interested party who desired to appear before this 
Tribunal. However, neither for the Tribunal hearings at Srinagar nor for the hearings at Delhi did anyone 
appear on behalf of JKNF to contest the proceedings. 


45. On 27.07.2024, elaborate submissions were heard on behalf of the Union of India under section 
123 of the Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) of the UAP Rules, 1968 for claiming privilege / 
confidentiality in respect of certain documents submitted in a sealed envelope; and as referred to in the 
paragraph 12 of the affidavit of the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Further, 
arguments were also addressed on the same day in respect of existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ for JK NF 
to be declared as an ‘unlawful association’. On 27.07.2024 itself, order in the matter was reserved. 


26 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


VI. NON-APPEARANCE ON BEHALF OF JKNF IN THESE PROCEEDINGS 


46. Despite service of notice upon the leaders/office bearers of JKNF, no appearance was put in on 
behalf of the said organization at any stage of the Tribunal’s proceedings. This Tribunal has also not 
received any intimation from any interested party seeking to depose before this Tribunal. 


47. Ample opportunity has been afforded by this Tribunal to the JKNF/ its office bearers to appear 
before this Tribunal and give their written version/ adduce evidence, in opposition to the factual version 
of the Central government, as regards the activities of the said organization. Apart from effecting service 
on the JKNF and its office bearers in the manner aforesaid, this Tribunal even held public hearing/s in 
Srinagar to enable members of the JKNF and/ or member of the public to participate in the proceedings 
of the Tribunal. However, the said opportunity was not availed by the JKNF or any of its office bearers. 


48. This Tribunal is conscious that despite there being no contest from the JKNF to the notification 
of the Central Govt. declaring it to be an illegal association, Tribunal is still required to make an 
“objective determination” as mandated in the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (supra). The credibility of the material/evidence placed on record by the Central 
Government is still required to be tested. It needs a highlight that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has 
cautioned that the procedure to be adopted must achieve this purpose and must not be reduced to mere 
acceptance of the “ipse dixit of the Central Government’. This Tribunal is thus required to 
independently assess the credibility of the material / evidence placed on record by the Central 
Government, and on that basis, come to a conclusion as to whether or not there is sufficient cause for 
declaring the JKNF as an ‘unlawful organisation’. 


Vil. EVIDENCE ADDUCED BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL 
PW-1 


49. Mr. Kuldeep Raj (PW-1), currently posted as Dy. S.P., Anantnag, Kashmir tendered his 
affidavit as Ex.PW1/A-1. He deposed that he is the supervising officer of the cases bearing FIR No. 
198/2004 and 197/2012 and in the course of discharge of his duties as a supervising officer, had gone 
through the records of the above said FIR’sno. 198/2004 and 197/2012, and was well conversant with 
the facts thereof. He also deposed that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose 
before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization as Ex. PW 1/A. 


50. PW | further deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) 
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number S.O. 1296 (8) dated 12 
March 2024 had declared Jammu Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness also 
deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities. 


51. PW 1 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization which was formed 
in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground organization to provide 
logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne out from records that 
the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India propaganda for fueling 
secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of the State of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness stated that JKNF and its members have been involved in 
anti-national activities causing law-and-order problem in the erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir and 
now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir, and are backed by Pakistan and other terrorist organizations. PW 
1 further deposed that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent faces of JKNF are (i) 
Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice Chairman-I), (iii) Abdul Salam 
Rather (Vice Chairman-I]), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice Chairman-III), (v) Mohammad Khalil 
Kawa (Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive Member). 


52. PW | testified that on 04.05.2004 at 14:45 hours, a docket was sent through Constable Zahoor 
Ahmad for registration of FIR, which was received by the Incharge, Police Station Anantnag 
mentioning therein that on 04.05.2004 at 14:25 hours during the patrolling duties at Lal Chowk 
Anantnag, Hurriyat Leader(s) i) Shabir Ahmad Shah, ii) Sheikh Abdul Aziz, iii) Mohammad Yaseen 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 27 


Malik andiv) Javid Ahmad Mir were leading a procession and appealing to the general public to boycott 
the upcoming parliamentary elections. The procession was dispersed using tear smoke shells and in the 
midst of it, the Hurriyat leaders fled away. PW 1 further deposed that leading to the said incident, FIR 
No. 198/2004 was registered on 04.05.2004 at PS Anantnag u/s 132 of the Representation of Peoples 
Act, 1951. A true copy of FIR No. 198/2004 in vernacular along with its true English Translation was 
relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW 1/1. 


53. PW 1 deposed that during investigation of the case, statements of material witnesses were 
recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C who corroborated the contents of the written complaint. Witness 
further stated that the investigation of the case is at its fag end and the Charge-sheet is likely to be filed 
very soon. True copies of the statements of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C in vernacular along 
with their true English translations were relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW 1/2 to Ex. PW 1/6. 


54. Witness further testified that on 19.06.2012 at 18:10 hours, a docket was received for 
registration of FIR from In-charge Police Station Janglat Mandi to Police Station Anantnag mentioning 
that a huge gathering lead by Qazi Yasir s/o late Qazir Nisar Ahmad along with Hurriyat Leaders 
Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Shabir Ahmad Shah and Akbar Bhat delivered speeches to the gathering wherein 
they instigated the public to struggle for freedom, aimed at harming the integrity of the nation. The 
unruly mob used one Sumo vehicle during the procession bearing registration no. 8666/JKO3A on which 
a loud speaker was fitted. In the procession, Hurriyat leaders namely i) Sarjan Ahmad Wagay ii) Zahid 
Ahmad Wagay iii) Irfan Ahmad Shah iv) Md. Ashraf Allia v) Zahid Bashir vi) Rayees Ahmad Khardi 
vii) Ab. Salam Bhatv iii) Ahsan Amin Bhat ix) Shah Fasil x) Irfan Ahmad Khan xi) Mohd. Rafiq xii) 
Faisal Ahmad Bhat and xiii) Janisht Mushtaq Misger raised slogans in favor of freedom of Kashmir 
from India, aimed at harming the integrity of the nation. On being asked to disperse, the unruly mob 
pelted stones upon the police and security force deployed for law-and-order duties. Witness stated that 
leading to the said incident, FIR No. 197/2012 was registered on 19.06.2012 at PS Anantnag u/s 
147/148/149/152/336 of RPC and u/s 13(1) of UA(P)A. A true copy of FIR No. 197/2012 in vernacular 
along with its true [English translation was relied upon by PWI = as 
Ex. PW 1/7. 


55. Witness deposed that during investigation of the case, incriminating materials were seized and 
a seizure memo was prepared, and statements of material witnesses were also recorded under section 
161 Cr.P.C. who corroborated the contents of the written complaint. True copies of the statements of 
the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C. in vernacular along with their true English translations were 
relied upon by PW | as Ex. PW 1/8 to Ex. PW 1/11. A true copy of the seizure memo dated 20.06.2012 
prepared during investigation of FIR No. 197/2012, in vernacular, along with its true English translation 
was relied upon by PW 1 as Ex. PW 1/12. 


56. PW 1 further deposed that though the investigation of the case began and statements of 
witnesses were recorded but due to the adverse situation created in the valley by the separatist leaders 
and their organizations including JKNF who had staunch support from cross border and terrorist outfits, 
people used to fear in giving statements against them. Any investigation carried out against the 
separatist organizations and their leaders resulted in huge outcry and turmoil in the respective regions 
which has always been a prominent cause for delay in conclusion of investigation against these 
organizations and their leaders. Witness further deposed that JKNF, since its inception, has been 
propagating anti-national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by 
Pakistan and its agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which 
are active within Jammu and Kashmir. PW 1 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during 
the course of service and the records of the cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members 
have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of 
the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


57. PW | further testified that sufficient material has been brought on record which establishes that 
the activities of JKNF are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


PW-2 


58. Saqib Gani (PW-2) who is currently posted as Dy.S.P. Budgam, Kashmir tendered his affidavit 
as Ex. PW2/B and deposed that he is the supervisory officer of the cases bearing FIR No. 110/2014 and 
FIR No. 93/2016 and having gone through the case records, was well conversant with the facts and 
circumstances of these cases. PW 2 deposed that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority 
to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization as Ex. PW 2/A. 


59. PW 2 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number 5.0. 1296 (E) dated 12 March 
2024 had declared Jammu Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further 
deposed that he had read the brief Background note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities.PW 2 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from the records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of 
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. PW 2 further stated that JK NF and its members have been 
involved in anti-national activities causing law-and-order problem in the erstwhile State of Jammu & 
Kashmir and now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and are backed by Pakistan and other terrorist 
organizations. PW 2 further testified that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent faces 
of JKNEF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice Chairman-D, 
(iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice Chairman-IID), (v) 
Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and(vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive Member). 


60. PW 2 testified that on 11.06.2014, at about 10:30 hrs. an information was received to the effect 
that Syed Ali Shah Geelani Chairman Hurriyat (G) has held a conference at his Hyderpora residence in 
commemoration of the martyrs of 2010 and after the conclusion of the conference Syed Ali Shah 
Geelani along with other associates of Huriyat (G) namely Shabir Ahmad Shah, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, 
Aayaz Akbar, Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Pir Saifullah, Mohd Amin have defied the orders of the District 
Magistrate, Srinagar issued vide no. DMS/GBD/ 144-CRPC/358-365/ 14 dated 24.04.2014 where under 
orders were for keeping Syed Ali Shah Geelani under house arrest. The above named Hurriyat leaders 
after defying the said order, prevented the Police from discharging their legitimate duties, came to 
Hyderpora Chowk in the form of an ‘unlawful assembly’ and stopped the movement of traffic on 
Airport road and started sloganeering against the sovereignty of India. The act of the above Hurriyat 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 29 


leaders amounted to cognizable offences punishable u/s 13 UA(P) Act and u/s 147, 341, 353 RPC. 
Consequently, FIR No. 110/2014 was registered against the accused. A true copy of FIR No. 110/2014 
in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/1. 


61. Witness further stated that the investigation of the case was conducted and statements of 
witnesses were recorded who corroborated the incident and the contents of the FIR, and hence based on 
the incriminating material collected against the accused, charge-sheet was filed before the concerned 
court. A true copy of the charge-sheet filed in FIR No. 110/2014 in vernacular along with its true English 
translation was relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/2. True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded 
under section 161 CrP.C were relied upon by PW 1 as Ex. PW 2/3 to 
Ex. PW 2/5. 


62. Witness further deposed that on 12.05.2016, at Hyderpora Chowk, separatist leader namely 
Nayeem Ahmad Khan s/o Gh. Mohd. Khan appeared and sat in the center of the road, thereby blocking 
vehicular movement. He was advised by Police party not to do so but he attacked the police party and 
restrained them from performing legitimate duties. The act of the said Hurriyat leader attracted 
provisions of cognizable offences u/s 341/353 RPC. To this effect FIR No. 93/2016 came to be 
registered in PS Budgam. A true copy of FIR No. 93/2016 in vernacular along with its true English 
translation was relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/6.Witness further stated that the investigation of the 
case was conducted and statements of witnesses were recorded who corroborated the incident and the 
contents of the FIR. Hence, based on the incriminating material collected against the accused, charge- 
sheet bearing challan no. 226 of 2022 was filed before the concerned court on 11.11.2022. A true copy 
of the charge-sheet no. 226 of 2022 filed in FIR No. 93/2016 in vernacular along with its true English 
translation was relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/7.True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded 
under section 161 Cr.P.C were relied upon by PW 2 as Ex. PW 2/8 and 
Ex. PW 2/9. 


63. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 
agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 2 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members have been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and security of 
the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


64. PW 2 further testified that sufficient material has been brought on record which establishes that 
the activities of JKNF are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting 
feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government in a manner which is prejudicial to the 
territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


PW-3 


65. Rameez Rashid Bhat (PW - 3), Deputy Superintendent of Police, Hajin, Bandipora, Kashmir 
tendered his affidavit as Ex.PW3/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of the case bearing 
FIR No. 17/2014 and that in the course of his duties, had gone through the records of the case diary of 
FIR No. 17/2014, and was well conversant with the facts. Witness further deposed that he had been 
authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon such authorization 
as Ex. PW 3/A-1. 


66. PW 3 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number S.O. 1296 (E) dated 127 March 
2024 had declared Jammu Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further 
deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities.PW 3 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from the records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of 
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. PW 3 further stated that JKNF and its members have been 
involved in anti-national activities causing law-and-order problem in the erstwhile State of Jammu & 
Kashmir and now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and are backed by Pakistan and other terrorist 
organizations. PW 3 further deposed that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent faces 
of JKNEF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice Chairman-D, 
(iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice Chairman-II]), (v) 
Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive Member). 


67. PW 3 further deposed that on 07.03.2014, in furtherance of the objectives of JKNF and other 
prime separatist organizations, after completion of the Friday prayers separatist Hurriyat leaders namely 
(i) Shabir Ahmad Shah (Chairman, JKDFP), (1) Mushtaq-ul-Islam, (iii) Nayeem Ahmad Khan, (iv) 
Bashir Ahmad Dar, (v) Mohammad Yousuf Naqash and (vi) Mohammad Yasin gathered around general 
public at main chowk Hajin and threatened them with dire consequences for participating in the general 
elections. The above said persons with an intent to threaten sovereignty of India, raised Pro-Pakistani 
and anti-national slogans like ‘Pakistan Zindabad’. Witness further stated that the said procession was 
organized without any permission from the administration and was unlawful. Consequently, FIR No. 
17/2014 was registered on 07.03.2014 at PS Hajin, Bandipora u/s 132 of the Representation of Peoples 
Act, u/s 13 of the UA(P) Act and u/s 147/148 of the Ranbir Penal Code. A true copy of FIR No. 17/2014 
in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 3 as Ex. PW 3/1. 


68. Witness testified that the investigation in the aforesaid FIR was conducted and statements of 
witnesses were recorded who corroborated the incident and the contents of the FIR, and based on the 
incriminating material collected against the accused, charge-sheet bearing challan no. 01/2022 was filed 
before the concerned court on 07.01.2022. A true copy of the charge-sheet no. 01/2022 filed in FIR no. 
17/2014 in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 3 as Ex. PW 3/2. 
True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C were relied upon by PW 
3 as Ex. PW 3/3 to Ex. PW 3/6. Witness further stated that the trial of the case is still pending. 


69. Witness further deposed that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile 
situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received support 
from across the border and terrorist organizations which deterred individuals from coming forward to 
provide statements, hindering the progress of the investigations and any attempt to probe these separatist 
organizations and their leaders triggered widespread unrest and turmoil causing further delays. It was 
only after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the investigation 
which resulted in completion of the same. 


70. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 31 


agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 3 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and continuously advocating secession of territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir from the Indian dominion; 


b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


PW-4 


71. Aftab Awan (PW-4), currently posted as S.D.P.O, Magam, Kashmir tendered his affidavit as 
Ex. PW4/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of cases bearing FIR no. 36/2015, FIR no. 
39/2015 and FIR no. 40/2015, and having gone through the case records, was well conversant with the 
facts and circumstances of these cases. Witness further affirmed that he had been duly authorized by the 
competent authority to depose before this Hon’ble Tribunal and relied upon such authorization as PW 
4/ A-1. 


72. PW 4 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number 5.0. 1296 (E) dt. 12 March 2024 
had declared Jammu Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further deposed 
that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and in view 
of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge acquired 
during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the secessionist 
activities.PW 4 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization which was 
formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground organization 
to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne out from 
records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India propaganda for 
fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of Jammu & Kashmir 
from the Union of India. Witness stated that JKNF and its members have been involved in anti-national 
activities causing law-and-order problem in the erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir and now in the 
UT of Jammu & Kashmir and are backed by Pakistan and other terrorist organizations. PW 4 further 
affirmed that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent faces of JKNF are (i) Nayeem 
Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice Chairman-]), (iii) Abdul Salam Rather 
(Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice Chairman-II]), (v) Mohammad Khalil Kawa 
(Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive Member). 


73. Witness further stated on oath that numerous FIR’s have been registered against the leaders of 
JKNF for various offences. PW 4 deposed that on 20.04.2015, at 1530 hrs., P.S. Magam received a 
written docket through Ct. Mudasir Ahmad forwarded by SI Mohd Yousuf 51/PAU to the effect that 


32 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the officer along with H.Ct. Rajpal Singh, Ct. Mudasir Ahmad, Ct. Mushtaq Ahmad, Ct. Abdul Majeed 
and a patrol party from CRPF were performing law and order duties at Narbal. In the meanwhile, 
chairman Hurriyat (G) Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Farooq Ahmad Rather, Hurriyat (U) chairman Molvi 
Umar Farooq, Nayeem Khan and JKLF chairman Mohd. Yasin Malik who had come to Narbal to offer 
condolence to the family of a deceased person namely Suhail Ahmad Sofi, addressed a huge crowd and 
raised pro-separatist, pro-Pakistan, pro-azadi slogans. They also raised anti-India slogans during the 
speeches, thereby provoking crowd sentiments of hate and violence against the nation. After the address, 
the agitated crowd pelted stones on police personnel and CRPF Party deployed for law & order duties 
and also restrained vehicular traffic on Gulmarg-Narbal road. The acts done by the above-mentioned 
persons amounted to the commission of cognizable offences u/s 147,148,336, 341 RPC and section 13 
UA@®) Act leading to registration of FIR No. 36/2015. A true copy of FIR no. 36/2015 in vernacular 
along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/1. 


74. Witness testified that investigation in the FIR case was conducted during which incriminating 
material was seized and statements of witnesses were recorded, substantiating the guilt of the accused 
persons and accordingly, charge-sheet was filed on 03.11.2022 in the jurisdictional Court of JMIC 
Magam. Witness deposed that accused nos. 4 & 5 were subsequently released on bail whereas accused 
nos. 2 & 3 are currently lodged at Tihar Jail, Delhi, pending trial of the case. A true copy of the charge- 
sheet in vernacular along with true English translation of its relevant portion was relied upon by PW 4 
as Ex. PW 4/2.A true copy of seizure memo dated 20.05.2015 prepared during investigation of FIR no. 
36/2015, in vernacular, along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 
4/3.True copies of the statements of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C in vernacular along with 
their true English translations were relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/4 and Ex. PW 4/5. 


hs PW 4 further affirmed on oath that on 21-04-2015, P.Stn. Magam received a docket that when 
SI Mohd Yousuf, HC Farooq Ahmad, Sgct. Ali Mohd, Ct. Tauseef Ahmad and nafri of IRP and CRPF 
were deployed at Narbal for maintaining law and order, during that time, JKDFP president Shabir 
Ahmad Shah, Zafar Akbar Bhat of Salvation Movement, Nayeem Ahmad Khan of JKNF and Asiya 
Indrabi, Chairperson of Dukhtran-e-Milat reached the house of deceased Suhail Ahmad Sofi for 
offering condolence. The said leaders delivered speech to a huge gathering at Narbal during which they 
raised slogans in favour of Pakistan & azadi and also chanted anti-India slogans thereby spreading hate 
against India amongst the general public. Thereafter, the agitated mob pelted stones upon deployed 
police/security forces and blocked Narbal-Gulmarg road. The acts committed by the accused persons 
attracted cognizable offences punishable u/s 13 UA(P) Act and u/s 147,148,341,336 RPC. On receipt 
of the aforementioned docket, FIR No. 39/2015 was registered at P.Stn. Magam. A true copy of FIR 
no. 39/2015 in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 
4/6. Witness further deposed that investigation of the FIR was conducted during which incriminating 
material was seized and statements of witnesses were recorded, substantiating the guilt of the accused 
persons, and accordingly, charge-sheet bearing challan no. 133/2015 was filed on 03.11.2022 in the 
jurisdictional Court of Judicial Magistrate 17 Class, Magam (Budgam). A true copy of the charge-sheet 
in vernacular along with its true English translation of the relevant portion was relied upon by PW 4 as 
Ex. PW 4/7. True copy of seizure memo dated 21.04.2015 prepared during investigation of FIR no. 
39/2015, in vernacular, along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 
4/8.True copy of the statement of the witness recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C in vernacular along with its true 
English translation was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/9. 


70. PW 4 further testified that on 24.04.2015 at 1730 hrs., a written docket was received through 
Ct. Showkat Ahmad, forwarded by SI Mohd. Yousuf to the effect that the officer along with other 
officials and a patrol party from CRPF, IRP & JKAP were performing law and order duties at Narbal 
when Farooq Ahmad Rather who is affiliated with Hurriyat 0, assisted with Mehraj-ud-Din Kalwal, 
Ghulam Ahmad Khan Sopori, Nayeem Ahmad Khan and Zahid Ali Lone of JEI, all of whom had 
come to Narbal to offer condolence to the family of a deceased person namely Suhail Ahmad at his 
house, addressed a huge crowd of people at Narbal Chowk and raised pro-azadi, pro-Pakistan, and anti- 
India slogans. Resultantly, agitated crowd resorted to pelting of stones on police personnel/security 
forces. Further, the violent mob heavily pelted stones on CRPF 176 Bn. camp located at Narbal. The 
act done by the above-mentioned persons amounted to the commission of cognizable offences u/s 147, 
148, 336, 341, 353 RPC and section 13 UA(P) Act. On receipt of this docket, FIR no. 40/2015 was 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 33 


registered. A true copy of FIR no. 40/2015 in vernacular along with its true English translation was 
relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/10. 


77. Witness further testified that investigation of the case was conducted during which 
incriminating material was seized, statements of witnesses were recorded and after collecting sufficient 
material which substantiated the guilt of the accused, charge-sheet was filed on 03.11.2022 in the 
jurisdictional Court of JMIC, Magam (Budgam). A true copy of the charge-sheet in vernacular along 
with true English translation of its relevant portion was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/11.True copy 
of Seizure Memo dated 24.11.2015 prepared during course of investigation in FIR no. 40/2015, in 
vernacular, along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/12.True copies 
of the statements of the witnesses recorded u/s 161 Cr.P.C in vernacular along with their true English 
translations were relied upon by PW 4 as Ex. PW 4/13 and Ex. PW 4/14. Witness further affirmed that 
the investigation faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by 
separatist leaders who received support from across the border which created a climate of fear which 
deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the progress of the 
investigations. 


78. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 
agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 4 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of territory of J&K from the Indian 
dominion; 

b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


79. PW 4 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities 
of JKNF were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government and that the members of JKNF are indulging and 
acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed due to non-appearance on behalf of JKNF. 
PW-5 


80. Mohd. Ashrif (PW-5), currently posted as $.D.P.O, Saddar, Srinagar Kashmir, tendered his 
affidavit as Ex.PW5/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of case bearing FIR No. 
285/2003 and was well conversant with the facts and circumstances thereof. Witness further stated that 
he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal and relied upon 
such authorization as Ex. PW 5/A-1. 


81. PW 5 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number 5.0. 1296 (E) dated 12 March 
2024 had declared Jammu Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further 


34 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities.PW 5 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from the records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness further stated that JKNF and its members 
have been involved in anti-national activities causing law & order problem in the erstwhile State of 
Jammu & Kashmir and now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and are backed by Pakistan and other 
terrorist organizations. PW 5 further testified that it is also borne out from the records that most 
prominent faces of JKNF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom 
(Vice Chairman-I), (iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice 
Chairman-IID), (v) Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive 
Member). 


82. Witness affirmed on oath that on 10.09.2003, P.Stn. Sadder received a written docket from ASI 
Deep Singh informing that in terms of the specific input received, 2 suspects namely Nayeem Ahmad 
and Abdul Qayoom Ganie were intercepted after putting up a naka at Hyderpora Byepass and a search 
was conducted. The above-named suspects were found to be travelling in a Maurti Car bearing Reg. no. 
JKO1G-2227 (white colour) and were found having in their possession cash amounting to Rs. 8.98 lacs 
which was further revealed to have been received from Pakistan’s ISI for distribution amongst the 
terrorists to promote terror activities. Upon receipt of the said information, FIR No. 285/2003 was 
registered on 10.09.2003 at P. Stn. Sadder u/s 10 CLA Act and u/s 13 of UA(P) Act. A true copy of FIR 
No. 285/2003 in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 5 as Ex. PW 
5/1. 


83. Witness testified that during investigation of the FIR, statements of witnesses were recorded 
who corroborated the contents of the complaint. The IO of the case also seized the recovered amount 
and Maruti Car and prepared a seizure memo for the same. True copies of the statements of witnesses 
recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C were relied upon by PW 5 as Ex. PW 5/3 and Ex. PW 5/4. A true 
copy of seizure memo dated 10.09.2003 in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied 
upon by PW 5 as Ex. PW 5/5. PW 5 further deposed that based on the incriminating material collected 
during investigation which prima facie established the guilt of the accused, a charge-sheet was filed 
before the concerned court on 17.12.2006. A true copy of the charge-sheet filed in FIR No. 285/2003 
in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 5 as 
Ex. PW 5/2. 


84. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 
agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 5 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of territory of J&K from the Indian 
dominion; 
b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 


Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 35 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


85. PW 5 concluded his testimony by further affirming that it stood established that the activities 
of JKNF were aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of 
enmity and hatred against the lawful government and that the members of JKNF are indulging and 
acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


PW-6 


86. Sh. Vikram Nag(PW-6),currently posted as S.D.P.O Shaheedgunj, Kashmir, tendered his 
affidavit as Ex.PW6/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of cases bearing FIR no. 
192/1996, FIR no. 341/1998, FIR no. 108/2009 and FIR no. 72/2011 and having gone through the case 
records, was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of these cases. Witness further stated that 
he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Hon’ble Tribunal and 
relied upon such authorization as Ex. PW 6/A-1. 


87. PW 6 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number 5.0. 1296 (E) dated 12 March 
2024 had declared Jammu & Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further 
deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities.PW 6 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from the records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness also stated on oath that JKNF and its 
members have been involved in anti-national activities causing law & order problem in the erstwhile 
State of Jammu & Kashmir and now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and are backed by Pakistan and 
other terrorist organizations. PW 6 affirmed that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent 
faces of JKNF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice 
Chairman-I), (iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice 
Chairman-IID), (v) Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive 
Member). 


88. PW 6 further deposed that on 17.07.1996, P.Stn. Shergarhi received a written docket informing 
that on the said day, a mob headed by Syed Ali Shah Geelani along with others was seen holding the 
dead body of a militant Hilal Ahmad Beigh who was killed in an encounter with security forces at 
Parimpora. It was further informed that the mob was shouting anti-national slogans and pelted stones 
on the security forces as a result which some police officials got injured and some vehicles were also 
damaged. When the security forces fired tear gas shells and resorted to lathi charge in order to control 
the unruly mob and maintain peace, an unknown terrorist from interior side of Sarai Bala fired upon 
the police party with an intention to kill. Consequently, FIR No. 192/1996 was registered on 17.07.1996 
at P. Stn. Shergarhi, Srinagar u/s 307, 341, 148, 336, 332, 132 of the of the Ranbir Penal Code, u/s 13 
of the ULA(P) Act and u/s 7/27 of A. Act. A true copy of FIR No. 192/1996 in vernacular along with 
its true English translation was relied upon by PW 6 as 
Ex. PW 6/1. 


36 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


89. PW 6 further stated that investigation in the aforesaid FIR was conducted during the course of 
which statements of witnesses were recorded who corroborated the contents of the FIR. During the 
course of investigation, IO of the case also seized some articles from the place of occurrence for which 
a seizure memo was prepared. 


True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C in vernacular, along with 
their true English translations, were relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/2 and Ex. PW 6/3.A true copy 
of seizure memo prepared during the investigation, in vernacular, along with its true English translation 
was relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/4. 


90. PW 6 further testified that on 10.11.1998, P. Stn. Shergarhi received a written docket that on 
that day, in the Batamaloo area, when a mob headed by Javid Ahmad Mir along with others were seen 
coming out from different mohallas of the area in violation of Section 144 Cr.P.C. and reached the main 
road at old bus stand, the said mob raised anti-government and anti-national slogans against the 
sovereignty of India thereby inciting people to get freedom from India forcibly. It was further informed 
that the mob pelted stones on the police officials, restrained the traffic movement and caused damage 
to the shops and vehicles. Consequently, FIR No. 341/1998 was registered on 10.11.1998 at P.Stn. 
Shergarhi, Srinagar u/s 188, 147, 336, 341, 427 of the Ranbir Penal Code, u/s 13 of the UA(P) Act and 
u/s 10 of CLA.A true copy of FIR No. 341/1998 in vernacular along with its true English translation 
was relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/5. 


91. Witness further deposed that during the investigation of the aforesaid FIR, statements of 
witnesses were recorded who corroborated the incident and the contents of the FIR. During the course 
of the investigation, IO of the case also seized some articles from the place of occurrence for which a 
seizure memo was prepared. A true copy of the charge-sheet filed in FIR No. 341/1998 in vernacular 
along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/6. True copies of the 
statements of witnesses recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C. were relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/7 
and Ex. PW 6/8. A true copy of seizure memo, in vernacular, along with its true English translation 
was relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/9. Witness further stated that based on the incriminating material 
collected against the accused, charge-sheet was filed before the concerned court on 18.09.2023. 


92. PW 6 further deposed that on 15.11.2009, Police Station Batamaloo received an information 
that a meeting has been organized at Kashi Mohalla Community Hall under the leadership of Mushtaq 
Ahmad Bhat @ Mushtaq-ul-Islam along with other activists of Hurriyat wherein they are spreading 
hatred amongst general public against the unity and integrity of India by giving hateful speeches and 
provoking the public to indulge in anti-national activities to promote cessation of State of J&K from 
Union of India. Consequently, FIR No. 108/2009 was registered on 15.11.2009 at P. Stn. Batamaloo 
u/s 153A of the Ranbir Penal Code and u/s 13 of the UA(P) Act. A true copy of FIR No. 108/2009 in 
vernacular, along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 
6/10.Witnessfurther stated that during investigation of the aforesaid FIR, statements of witnesses were 
recorded who corroborated the incident and the contents of the FIR. True copies of the statements of 
witnesses recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C. were relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/11 and 
Ex. PW 6/12. 


93. PW 6 further stated on oath that on 16.09.2011, Police Station Karanagar received a DD report 
No. 16 along with a written docket informing that a prominent leader of Hurriyat namely Nayeem 
Ahmad Khan after offering the Friday prayers at Jamia Masjid came out on the road along with his 
other companions and started raising anti national & pro-freedom slogans. The said procession led by 
Nayeem Ahmad Khan tried to spread hatred amongst the public thereby causing harm to the sovereignty 
and integrity of India. Upon receiving the said information, FIR No. 72/2011 was registered on 
16.09.2011 at PS Karanagar u/s 147 of the Ranbir Penal Code and u/s 13 of the UA(P) Act. A true copy 
of FIR No. 72/2011 in vernacular along with its true English translation was relied upon by PW 6 as 
Ex. PW 6/13. Further, Witness deposed that during the investigation of the aforesaid FIR, statements 
of witnesses were recorded who corroborated the incident and the contents of the FIR. True copies of 
the statements of witnesses recorded under section 161 Cr.P.C. were relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 
6/15 and Ex. PW 6/16. 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 37 


94. PW 6 further affirmed that sufficient material was collected against the accused during 
investigation and consequently, a charge-sheet was filed before the concerned court on 11.03.2013. A 
true copy of the charge-sheet filed in FIR No. 72/2011 in vernacular along with its true English 
translation was relied upon by PW 6 as Ex. PW 6/14. Witness further stated that the investigations faced 
significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and 
their affiliated groups, who received support from across the border and terrorist organizations which 
created a climate of fear and deterred individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering 
the progress of the investigations, and it was only after the reorganization of the State that significant 
progress could be made in the investigation which resulted in filing of the charge-sheet. Witness further 
stated that challans have been filed in FIR nos. 341/1998 and 72/2011 whereas investigation is still 
pending in FIR nos. 192/1996 and 108/2009. Witness further deposed JKNF and leaders and members 
of the said organization who also had support from across the border have been actively and 
continuously supporting the separatist and banned organizations and have been openly advocating and 
inciting the people to bring about a secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. It is also 
established that the activities of JKNF are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by 
promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawful government and the members of JKNF are 
indulging and acting in a manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of 
the Union of India 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


PW7 


95. Sh. Hariprasad (PW-7), currently posted as SDPO, Kothibagh, Srinagar, tendered his affidavit 
as Ex.PW7/A and deposed that he was the supervising officer of cases bearing FIR no. 227 of 1987 and 
FIR no. 10 of 2014, and was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of these cases. Witness 
further stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Tribunal 
and relied upon such authorization as Ex. PW 7/A-1. 


96. PW 7 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number 5.0. 1296 (E) dated 12" March 
2024 had declared Jammu Kashmir National Front to be an “unlawful association”. Witness further 
deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities.PW 7 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of 
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. 


97. Witness also stated on oath that JKNF and its members who are backed by Pakistan and other 
terrorist organizations have been involved in anti-national activities causing law & order problem in the 
erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir and now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir. PW 7 affirmed that it 
is also borne out from the records that most prominent faces of JKNF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ 
Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice Chairman-)), (iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman- 
Il), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice Chairman-III), (v) Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and 
(vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive Member). 


98. PW 7 deposed that on 17.11.1987, Police Station Maisuma received a written docket informing 
that on the said day, an unruly mob coming from Maisuma bazar headed by Mohd. Ismail Bhat, Noor 
Mohd. Ganie, Abdul Razak Khan, Javid Ah. Najar, Ab. Qayoom Langoo,Mohd. Saleem Sheikh, Mohd 
Aslam Wani and Mushtaq Ahmad Dar proceeded towards Gowkadal while raising anti-national slogans 
which were secessionist and against the Constitution of India. Further, the unruly mob entered the police 
station without any justification and set ablaze one Jeep bearing reg. no. JKN 376 at Gowkadal. The 
violent mob instigated by the accused separatist leaders also pelted stones on police party and injured 


38 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


some police personnel and thereafter, proceeded towards Habbakadal. On their way to Habbakadal, 
they pelted stones on shops and damaged the public property. Consequently,FIR no. 227/1987 was 
registered on 17.11.1987 at P.Stn. Maisuma u/s 148, 149, 451, 436, 427, 332 of the Ranbir Penal Code 
and u/s 4(2) of TADA(P) Act. A true copy of FIR no. 227/1987 in vernacular along with its true English 


translation was relied upon by PW 7 as 
Ex. PW 7/1. 
99. Witness further stated on oath that during the investigation of the FIR, statements of witnesses 


were recorded who corroborated the incident and the vehicle used in the commission of the offence was 
also seized. Hence, based on the incriminating material collected against the accused, charge-sheet 
bearing No. 49/1988 was filed before the concerned court on 19.03.1988 wherein the Trial is still 
pending. A true copy of the charge-sheet filed in FIR No. 227/1987, in vernacular, along with its true 
English translation was relied upon by PW 7 as Ex. PW 7/2. 


100. PW 7 further testified that on 06.02.2014, a written docket was received at P.Stn. Kothibagh 
informing that on the said day the complainant, a Police Official, was informed by Nissar Ahmad Paul, 
Manager of Hotel Lal Rukh near Lal Chowk that in furtherance of the prime object of JENF which is 
secession of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India, a seminar was being conducted by PDF leaders 
Shabir Ahmad Shah, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Mushtaq UI Islam, Mohd. Ahsan Untoo etc. wherein the 
leaders have given speech that Govt. of India is occupying Jammu & Kashmir forcefully and live 
example of which is hanging of Mohd. Maqbool Bhat and Mohd. Afzal Guroo which was done 
unconstitutionally, and even the corpse of the said persons were not handed over to their legal heirs. 
The leaders present there also raised slogans ‘Hindutan Hai Hai’ ‘Pakistan Zindabad’ ‘Hum Kya 
Chahtay Azadi’. Based on the said information, FIR No. 10 of 2014 was registered at P.Stn. Kothibagh 
on 07.02.2014 against the named accused under section 13 of UA(P)A and under section 109 of the 
RPC. A true copy of FIR No. 10/2014 along with its true English Translation was relied upon by PW 7 
as Ex. PW 7/3. Witnessfurther affirmed that investigation in the said FIR was still underway as records 
had been destroyed in a fire incident in the police station. 


101. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 
agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 7 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of territory of J&K from the Indian 
dominion; 

b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 39 


PW 7A (This witness was also inadvertently examined as PW 7. Subsequently, in the proceedings dt. 
03.07.2024 held at the High Court of Delhi, it was clarified by the Tribunal that this witness shall be 
renumbered as PW 7A. However, there is no change/renumbering in the exhibit numbers of the 
documents relied upon by the witness as deposition had already been concluded and the deposition 
sheets had been signed in Srinagar.) 


102. Owais Ahmad (PW-7A), currently posted as SDPO, Charar-e-Sharief, Budgam, tendered his 
affidavit as Ex. PW 7/A-1 and deposed that he was the supervising officer of case bearing FIR no. 207 
of 2009, and having gone through the case records, was well conversant with the facts and 
circumstances of the case. Witness further stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent 
authority to depose before this Hon’ble Tribunal and relied upon such authorization as Ex. PW 7/A. 


103. |PW-7A deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number 5.0. 1296 (8) dated 12" March 
2024 had declared Jammu & Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further 
deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities.PW-7A further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of 
Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness also stated on oath that JKNF and its members 
who are backed by Pakistan and other terrorist organizations have been involved in anti-national 
activities causing law & order problem in the erstwhile State of Jammu & Kashmir and now in the UT 
of Jammu & Kashmir. PW-7A affirmed that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent 
faces of JKNF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice 
Chairman-I), (iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice 
Chairman-IID), (v) Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive 
Member) 


104. PW-7A further affirmed on oaththat on 20.11.2009, at 1515 hours, P.Stn. Chadoora received a 
docket informing that in connection with Friday prayers, the provincial president of Hurriyat 
Conference and JKNF chairman Nayeem Ahmad Khan appeared at new Jamia Masjid, Sharief Aram 
Mohalla, Chadoora and delivered speech against the State and Union government, besides chanted pro 
freedom slogans. He also delivered speeches in favour of Pakistan and praised terrorism, and thereby 
tried to entice the people. The act amounted to a cognizable offence. On receipt of this docket, FIR no. 
207/2009 u/s 13 UA(P) Act was registered. A true copy of FIR no. 207/2009 in vernacular along with 
its true English translation was relied upon by PW-7A as Ex. PW 7/1. 


105. Witness further stated that during the investigation of the aforesaid FIR, statements of witnesses 
were recorded who corroborated the incident and the contents of the FIR, and hence, based on the 
incriminating material collected against the accused, charge-sheet bearing challan No. 113/2022 was 
filed before the concerned court on 04.11.2022, trial of which is still pending. A true copy of the charge- 
sheet no. 113/2022 filed in FIR No. 207/2009 in vernacular along with its true English Translation was 
relied upon by the Witness as Ex. PW 7/2. True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C. were relied upon by the Witness as Ex. PW 7/3 to Ex. PW 7/5. Witness further 
deposed that the investigations faced significant challenges due to the volatile situation in the valley 
orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received unwavering support from 
across the border and terrorist organizations which created a climate of fear, deterring individuals from 
coming forward to provide statements, thereby hindering the progress of the investigations. It was only 
after the reorganization of the State that significant progress could be made in the investigation which 
resulted in completion of the investigation. 


106. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 


40 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 7A further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JKNF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of territory of J&K from the Indian 
dominion; 

b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police and Security Forces. 


107. PW-7A concluded his deposition by affirming that sufficient material has been brought on 
record which manifests that JKNF and leaders and members of the said organization who also had 
support from across the border, have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and 
banned organizations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a 
secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. It is also established that the activities of 
JKNEF are aimed at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity 
and hatred against the lawful government, and that the members of JKNF are indulging and acting ina 
manner which is prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


PW 8 


108. Sh. Murtaza Ahmad Peer (PW-8), currently posted as Dy.S.P., CIK, Srinagar tendered his 
affidavit as Ex. PW 8/A and deposed that he was the investigating officer of case bearing FIR no. 10 
of 2010 and being so, was well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the case. Witness further 
stated that he had been duly authorized by the competent authority to depose before this Hon’ble 
Tribunal and relied upon such authorization as Ex. PW 8/A - 1. 


109. 79 8 deposed that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers under Section 3(1) of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 vide notification number S.O. 1296 (E) dated 127 March 
2024 had declared Jammu & Kashmir National Front to be an unlawful association. Witness further 
deposed that he had read the brief Background Note on JKNF prepared by the Central Government and 
in view of the various cases registered against the said organization and its leaders, and the knowledge 
acquired during the course of service, he could state that JKNF and its leaders were involved in the 
secessionist activities. PW 8 further deposed that JKNF is a separatist and secessionist organization 
which was formed in the year 1989 by a separatist leader Nayeem Ahmad Khan as an upper ground 
organization to provide logistic support to the terrorist organizations in Jammu & Kashmir. It was borne 
out from records that the main objective of JKNF has been to support terrorism and anti-India 
propaganda for fueling secessionism in Jammu and Kashmir and to work towards the secession of the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. Witness also stated on oath that JKNF and its 
members have been involved in anti-national activities causing law &order problem in the erstwhile 
State of Jammu & Kashmir and now in the UT of Jammu & Kashmir who are backed by Pakistan and 
other terrorist organizations. PW 8 affirmed that it is also borne out from the records that most prominent 
faces of JKNF are (i) Nayeem Ahmad Khan @ Firdous (Chairman), (ii) Abdul Qayoom (Vice 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 41 


Chairman-I), (iii) Abdul Salam Rather (Vice Chairman-II), (iv) Narinder Singh Khalisa (Vice 
Chairman-IID), (v) Mohammad Khalil Kawa (Spokesperson) and (vi) Abdul Rashid Malik (Executive 
Member) 


110. PW 8 further deposed that during the investigation of FIR No. 15/1991, it came to light that in 
the year 2010, the separatist leaders accused in the FIR no. 15/1991, had amassed huge wealth and 
raised large number of assets through Hawala and other illegal channels of money laundering and were 
using the said money and assets for promoting violence/ militancy and their secessionist ideology in the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir. Based on the said revelation, FIR bearing No. 10/2010 was registered 
against the accused of FIR No. 15/1991, at Police Station, CIK, Srinagar, Kashmir u/ss 121A/120B of 
RPC and u/ss 13/17/18 of UA(P) Act. Witness further affirmed that after collecting sufficient material 
against the accused, a charge-sheet was filed in the case. A true copy of FIR no. 10/2010 along with 
true English translation of its relevant portion was relied upon by PW 8 as Ex. PW 8/1. 


111. PW 8 further testified that during investigation of the aforesaid FIR, notices were issued and 
statement of various witnesses were recorded. True copies of the statements of witnesses recorded under 
section 161 Cr.P.C in vernacular along with their true English translations were relied upon by PW 8 as 
Ex. PW 8/2 and PW 8/3. Witness further deposed that the investigation in the case of accumulation of 
assets by the premier separatist leaders has been initiated, and information has been sought from various 
banks and other authorities but due to the adverse law and order situation created by these leaders, the 
investigation could not be concluded as the investigation faced significant challenges due to the volatile 
situation in the valley orchestrated by separatist leaders and their affiliated groups, who received 
unwavering support from across the border and terrorist organizations. This climate of fear deterred 
individuals from coming forward to provide statements, hindering the progress of the investigations. PW 
8 further stated on oath that since the abrogation of Article 370 of the Constitution of India, the 
investigation of this case has also progressed and soon the investigation will be brought to its logical 
conclusion. 


112. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 
agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 8 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JK NF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of territory of J&K from the Indian 
dominion; 

b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 
Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


113. PW 8 concluded his deposition by affirming that sufficient material has been brought on record 
which manifests that JKNF and leaders and members of the said organization who also had support 
from across the border have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned 
organizations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a secession of 
Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. It is also established that the activities of JK NF are aimed 


42 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against 
the lawful government, and the members of JKNF are indulging and acting in a manner which is 
prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. 


Opportunity for cross-examination was given but not availed in view of non-appearance on behalf of 
JKNF. 


PW 9 


114. Mr. B.B. Pathak, currently posted as Dy. S.P., NIA, Delhi deposed as PW 9, being the 
investigating officer of RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI registered under sections 120B, 121 & 121A of the Indian 
Penal Code and sections 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 and 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 
1967 and in that capacity, was well conversant with the facts of the aforesaid case. PW 9 deposed to the 
effect that the Central Government, in exercise of its powers conferred under Sub- section (1) of Section 
3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 has declared the Jammu Kashmir National Front 
to be an unlawful association vide notification number S.O. 1296 (E) dated 12.03.2024 as there is 
sufficient evidence to establish that the Jammu Kashmir National Front indulged in anti- 
national\activities in the country. Witness further deposed that criminal case bearing RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI lodged under various sections of Indian Penal Code and Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1967 shows involvement of accused Nayeem Khan, Chairman of JKNF, in illegal and 
anti-national activities. 


115. PW 9 testified that credible information was received by the Central Government that Hafiz 
Muhammad Saeed, Amir of Jammat-ud-Dawah and the secessionist leaders, including the 
members/cadres of the Hurriyat Conference, have been acting in connivance with active militants of 
proscribed terrorist organizations viz. Hizb-ul-Mujahideen, Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba, and 
other terrorist organizations for raising and receiving funds domestically and abroad through various 
illegal channels, including hawala, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in Jammu and Kashmir 
including pelting stones on the security forces, systematically burning of schools, damage to public 
property and waging war against India through the funds so collected, and as such have entered into a 
larger criminal conspiracy for causing disruption in the Kashmir valley. Consequently, RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI was registered and taken up for investigation by NIA which is India’s federal 
counter-terrorism agency. A copy of RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI was relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/1 


116. PW 9 further testified that investigation revealed that various terrorist organizations viz. JKLF, 
HM, LeT, in connivance with various secessionist groups, particularly the All Parties Hurriyat 
Conference 1.e. APHC and its constituents funded by Pakistan and its agencies and terror groups have 
entered into a criminal conspiracy to wage war against the Government of India for secession of the 
State of Jammu & Kashmir from the Union of India. PW 9 deposed that investigation revealed that 
APHC was formed as a conglomerate of 26 political/social/religious organizations in 1993 to give a 
political mask to the secessionist activities. This alliance has been consistently promoted and supported 
by Pakistan to fulfill its evil motive to establish its claim over Jammu & Kashmir. In the year 2008, the 
APHC split into three factions. One faction was headed by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and is called as APHC 
(M), the other is led by Syed Ali Shah Geelani and is called as APHC (G) and the third faction is led by 
Yasin Malik, head of JKLF. Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Faroog and Yasin Malik together 
had formed the Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) to promote the cause of secession of Jammu & 
Kashmir from the Union of India. The investigation revealed that JRL used to disseminate the calendar 
of protests through newspapers and other social media platforms. These protest calendars, with detailed 
instructions of hartal, picketing, blockage of routes and roads, suspension of public transport, 
instructions for organizing processions and marches, writing of graffiti on the walls and complete 
shutdown of markets and other economic activities, would exhort and provoke people to agitate against 
the State and the security forces, showing defiance against the Government of India. During the course 
of investigation, protest calendar for the period 06.08.2016 to 16.08.2016 was recovered and seized 
during search conducted in the house of one of the leaders of APHC namely Altaf Ahmad Shah @ 
Fantoosh. Investigation further revealed that during the period as mentioned in the seized protest 
calendar, the protests were very violent and led to the registration of 89 cases of stone-pelting and other 
unlawful activities including arson, school burning, damage to the public property and vehicles etc. In 
these incidents, 07 persons were killed and 175 persons got injured leading to arrest of 366 persons 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 43 


involved in such activities in Srinagar. Besides, as per the information received from BSF, 40 personnel 
of BSF got injured, who were dealing with the stone-pelting incidents from Sept. 2016 to June 2017. 


117. Witness further affirmed on oath that the secessionist agenda of the Hurriyat is also reflected 
on its website www.huriyatconference.com, which speaks about “Freedom struggle” and that “People 
of Jammu & Kashmir have been fighting against Indian Occupation”. Thereafter, pursuant to the 
investigation, charge sheet dated 18.01.2018 was filed before the Special Court, New Delhi against 12 
accused persons, including two designated terrorists, based in Pakistan, namely (i) Hafiz Muhammad 
Saeed and(ii) Mohd. Yusuf Shah @ Salahuddin, (iii) Aftab Ahmad Shah@ Shahid-ul-Islam, (iv) Altaf 
Ahmad Shah @ Fantoosh (now expired), (v) Nayeem Ahmad Khan who is Chairman of JKNF, (vi) 
Farooq Ahmad Dar @ Bitta Karate, (vit) Mohammad Akbar Khanday, (viii) Raja MehrajuddinKalwal, 
(ix) Bashir Ahmad Bhat @ Peer Saifullah, and (x) Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, who was involved in 
providing funds for terrorists and secessionist activities to APHC leaders through hawala. The case was 
further being investigated in terms of section 173 (8) of Cr.P.C. A copy of the charge-sheet dt. 
18.01.2018 was relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/2. 


118. PW 9 further stated on oath that investigation revealed that Nayeem Khan, Chairman of JKNF, 
had along with other accused persons played a key role in building the separatist/militant movement in 
Jammu and Kashmir. On 03.06.2017, several premises belonging to the separatists and the accused 
arraigned in the case including Nayeem Khan, were searched in Jammu and Kashmir, and several 
incriminating documents were seized. A copy of the seizure memo dated 03.06.2017 prepared during 
investigation was relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/3. During the aforesaid search conducted in the 
house of accused Nayeem Khan, amongst other incriminating documents seized, two letters written by 
Hizbul Mujahideen (HM) Area Commander requesting accused Nayeem Khan for financial assistance 
and 21 blank letter heads of Lashkar-e-Toiba (LeT) were also seized. Copies of these letters along with 
their true English translations were relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/4. 


119. PW 9 further testified that during investigation, one video was downloaded from the open 
source which shows the accused Nayeem Khan visiting the area where three terrorists were killed on 
11.07.2017 at Budgam, Srinagar. This video shows him with the supporters of ISIS, a proscribed 
terrorist organization under UA(P) Act. This clearly establishes that the terrorist organizations and the 
Hurriyat leaders of Jammu & Kashmir are acting in unison in waging war against the Government of 
India. Further, during investigation, one video was collected from the office of India Today T.V. News 
Channel which shows the role of Pakistan in funding secessionist activities in J & K. In the said videos, 
accused Nayeem Khan of JKNF admits that the secessionists and terrorists of the valley were receiving 
financial support from Pakistan and would have received approximately Rs. 200 crores to organise anti- 
India protests and agitations after the killing of Burhan Wani. Accused Nayeem Khan further speaks in 
the video about funds reaching them from Saudi Arabia/ Dubai through Hawala. Nayeem Khan 
admitted that Pakistan High Commission had played a pivotal role in conveying and receiving 
instructions from Pakistan, and also admitted that, if funded, he can fuel unrest in the Valley at any 
time. Copies of the transcript of the afore-said videos has been relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/5. 
The voice sample of accused Nayeem Khan and the voice in the aforesaid video were forensically 
examined and the CFSL report has confirmed that both are voices are of the same person. Copy of the 
CFSL report has been relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/6. 


120. Witness further deposed that investigation further ascertained that the students who were 
proceeding to Pakistan on a student visa were either relatives or ex-militants or relatives of active 
militants who had indulged in various anti-national activities. It was further ascertained that their 
applications for visa were recommended by various Hurriyat leaders including Nayeem Khanof JKNF. 
Further, militants/ ex-militants who had fled to Pakistan would pursue their admission cases with the 
concerned medical colleges with the help of Hurriyat leaders based in Pakistan/ PoK. These students 
who are recommended for allotment of MBBS seats and engineering seats in Pakistan are also offered 
scholarships under various schemes of Pakistan Government. This shows a triangular nexus wherein 
the terrorists, the Hurriyat and the Pakistani establishment are the three vertices, and they are ostensibly 
patronizing the Kashmiri students in order to prepare a generation of doctors and technocrats in Kashmir 
who will have leanings towards Pakistan. One such letter written on the letter-head of JKNF was seized 
from the house of accused Nayeem Khan, wherein he, in the capacity of the Chairman of JKNF, 


44 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


recommended a student for admission in a ‘Standard Medical College’ in Pakistan because her family 
has remained committed to the freedom struggle through thick and thin. Copy of the said letter has been 
relied upon by PW 9 asEx. PW 9/7. 


121. PW 9 further testified that during investigation, several witnesses were examined and their 
statements have been recorded under section 161 and 164 of the Cr.P.C., a perusal of which would 
reveal that the members and leaders of APHC, with the support of agencies of Pakistan, Pakistan based 
terrorist organizations and secessionist groups and their alliance parties, have entered into a criminal 
conspiracy and adopted the strategy of instigating the local public to resort to violence, to observe 
strikes, cause forcible closure of roads, schools & govt. institutions and to create a surcharged 
atmosphere, which is conducive for the propagation of their secessionist agenda. Members and leaders 
of APHC and its constituents including JKNF, have been found to be involved in the above-mentioned 
unlawful activities. The statements of the protected witnesses (in terms of Section 44 of the UA(P)A) 
code named as Alpha, Gamma, Jack, John, Jerry, W74 and AW69, in a sealed cover, were submitted 
by PW 9 for the perusal of this Tribunal and the same were taken on record as Ex. PW 9/8. 


122. Witness further stated that on 24.07.2017, accused Nayeem Khan being Chairman of JKNF was 
arrested in the instant case, being complicit in the conspiracy related to secessionist and terrorist 
activities in the State of Jammu & Kashmir. A copy of arrest memo of Nayeem Khan dated 24.07.2017 
was relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/9.Witness further testified that based on the evidence collected, 
the 2nd supplementary charge-sheet was filed on 04.10.2019 u/s 120B, 121, 121A & 124A IPC and 
Section 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 38 & 39 of UA(P) Act, in the Special Court, NIA, New Delhi against five 
accused persons namely Mohd. Yasin Malik of JKLF, Shabir Ahmad Shahof JKDFP, Masarat Alam 
Bhat of Muslim League, Syeda Aasiya Andrabi of Dukhtaran-e-Millat and Abdul Rashid Sheikh of 
Awami Itehadi Party. A copy of the 2nd supplementary charge-sheet dt. 04.10.2019 was relied upon by 
PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/10. 


123. 7५४ further deposed from records that the charge has been framed against accused Nayeem 
Khan for the offences under sections u/s 120B IPC, 121 IPC, 121A IPC, section 13 UA(P)A r/w 
1208 IPC, section 15 UA(P)A r/w 1208 IPC, section 17 UA(P)A 1/ए 120B IPC and sections 18, 20, 39 
& 40 of UA(P)A, on 16.03.2022. A Copy of the Charge Order dated 16.03.2022 passed by the ld. 
Special Judge, NIA, New Delhi was relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/11. Further, accused Yasin 
Malik, had pleaded guilty to the charges, following which he was convicted of all the charges framed 
against him u/ss 120-B, 121, 121A IPC, section 13 UA(P)A r/w section 120-B IPC, section 15 UA(P)A 
t/w section 120- 8 IPC, and ss. 17, 18, 20, 38, 39 UA(P)A, and sentenced with rigorous imprisonment 
for life along with a fine of Rs. 10 lakhs. A copy of the order dated 25.05.2022 convicting Yasin Malik 
was relied upon by PW 9 as Ex. PW 9/12. The trial qua the other 11 co-accused persons is still 
underway and is further listed on 13.08.2024 and 14.08.2024 for examination of witnesses. 


124. Witness further affirmed on oath that JKNF, since its inception, has been propagating anti- 
national narrative and secessionist propaganda in Jammu and Kashmir, backed by Pakistan and its 
agencies inimical to India which have openly supported terrorist organizations which are active within 
Jammu and Kashmir. PW 9 further testified that from the knowledge acquired during the course of 
service and the records of the criminal cases, it is manifest that JK NF and its leaders and members have 
been: 


a) incessantly encouraging and advocating secession of territory of J&K from the Indian 
dominion; 
b) incessantly encouraging and inciting separatist groups, on religious lines to destabilize the 


Government of India; 


०) committing acts which are intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India and to bring 
about cession of lawful authority of Government of India in the territory of J&K; 


d) promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the territorial integrity and 
security of the country; 


e) tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines; 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 45 


f) incited and lured the youth of Jammu and Kashmir for violence to disrupt the peace in the 
valley and in order to keep the anti- India pot boiling, announced hartal calls and issued 
protest calendars, leading to riots which resulted in the injuries and death of several civilians, 
police officials and Security Forces personnel. 


125. PW 9 concluded his deposition by affirming that sufficient material has been brought on record 
which manifests that JKNF and leaders and members of the said organization who also had support 
from across the border have been actively and continuously supporting the separatist and banned 
organizations and have been openly advocating and inciting the people to bring about a secession of 
Jammu and Kashmir from the Union of India. It is also established that the activities of JK NF are aimed 
at causing disaffection, disloyalty and dis-harmony by promoting feelings of enmity and hatred against 
the lawful government, and the members of JKNF are indulging and acting in a manner which is 
prejudicial to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of the Union of India. Consequently, the decision 
of the Central Government to declare the Jammu Kashmir National Front (JKNF) as unlawful 
association under the provisions of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 is just, proper and 
bona fide. 


PW 10 


126. Sh. Rajesh Kumar Gupta, presently posted as Director (CT) in the Government of India, 
Ministry of Home Affairs deposed as PW 10o0n behalf of the Central Government on the basis of his 
knowledge as derived from official records/ the relevant files concerning JKNF which he had been 
dealing with in his official capacity. 


127. | PW 10 deposed that the Notification no. 5. 0. 1296(E) dated 127 March 2024, issued by the 
Central Government is based on the information and material received from the central intelligence 
agency and Criminal Investigation Department of Government of Union Territory of Jammu and 
Kashmir, with regard to the unlawful activities of the Jammu Kashmir National Front. Witness further 
deposed that based on the above intelligence inputs, a note was prepared for the consideration of the 
Cabinet Committee on Security whereafter the said Committee took the decision and approved the 
proposal contained in the above note, in the meeting held on 7" March2024. Accordingly, the 
declaration was made and published vide notification dated 12" March 2024, bearing no. S. O. 1296(E). 
A copy of the said notification published in the official gazette dated 12.03.2024 was relied upon by 
PW 10 as Ex. PW 10/1. 


128. PW 10 further testified that the background note submitted to this Tribunal in terms of Rule 5 
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules 1968, vide letter dated 09" April, 2024 is based upon the 
material/ information as contained in the concerned file. A copy of the said Background Note was relied 
upon by PW 10 as Ex. PW 10/2. Witness further affirmed that various cases registered by the Jammu 
and Kashmir Police and National Investigation Agency throw light on the unlawful and subversive 
activities of the chairman and members of JKNF in regard to which officers concerned of the UT of 
J&K and of the NIA have filed affidavits before this Tribunal. Witness further submitted that various 
witnesses have already adduced evidences during the course of proceedings before this Tribunal in 
support of the declaration as contained in Notification no. 5. 0. 1296 (E) dated 12™ March, 2024 which 
clearly establish that JKNF is continuously indulging in unlawful activities which pose a serious threat 
to the internal security of the country. Further, PW 10 affirmed on oath that in addition, various 
intelligence inputs show that JKNF is continuing its unlawful activities which are prejudicial to the 
security of the country. The original file, duly indexed, containing above mentioned central intelligence 
reports/inputs was submitted for the perusal of this Tribunal and subject to the claim of privilege raised 
by the Central Govt. regarding the said original file under section 123 of Evidence Act read with Rule 
3(2) and proviso to Rule 5 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules of 1968, the same was taken on 
record as Ex. PW 10/3. 


129. PW 10 concluded his testimony by affirming that the ban imposed on JKNF under the UA(P)A, 
1967 may be affirmed by this Tribunal since as per the information received from various agencies, the 
banning of the JK NF is necessary in the interest of national security, sovereignty and territorial integrity 


46 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


of India as Chairman and members of the JKNF have been indulging in radicalizing and brainwashing 
the minds, and indoctrinating of youth through provocative speeches for separation of Jammu and 
Kashmir from Union of India. 


VIII. SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE UOI 


130. On 27.07.2024 the matter was fixed for addressing final submissions. Ld. Additional Solicitor 
General addressed arguments for claiming privilege for the documents produced in a sealed cover and 
also submitted arguments on the existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ to hold JKNF to be an unlawful 
association. Addressing the Tribunal first on the claim for privilege, 10. Addl. SG referred to section 
123 of the Evidence Act read with Rule 3(2) of the UA(P) Rules, 1968, which are reproduced as under: 


Indian Evidence Act, 1872 


“123. Evidence as to affairs of State — No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived 
from unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of 
the officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission 
as he thinks fit.” 


The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Rules, 1968 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.- 


(1) In holding an inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 or disposing of any application 
under sub-section (4) of section 7 or sub-section (8) of section 8, the Tribunal or the 
District Judge, as the case may be, shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), 
follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the 
Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books 
of account or other documents are claimed by that Government to be of a confidential 
nature then, the Tribunal or the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall 
not,- 


(a) Make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the 
proceedings before it; or 


(b) Allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books 
of account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the 
proceedings before it.” 


131. Learned Addl. Solicitor General submitted that the claim of privilege by the Union of India for 
the documents placed in a sealed cover has been made as the documents are of such a nature that the 
non-disclosure of which would be in the interest of the public. It was submitted that this concept of 
public interest is taken into account even in the criminal proceedings qua the accused, whereas in 
juxtaposition, the present matter stands at a much higher pedestal and involves the issue of sovereignty 
and integrity of the country. Learned Addl. SG submitted that in the cases concerning national security, 
sovereignty and integrity, the Tribunal has to interpret and analyze the material differently as the 
decisions taken by the Central Government in such manner are based on highly sensitive information 
and inputs; and the effects of such decisions are not confined to the boundaries of the nation. 


132. 10 support her arguments, Id. Addl. SG has relied upon the judgment delivered in a case of 
preventive detention i.e. Raj Kumar Singh vs. State of Bihar (1986) 4 SCC 407 wherein the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court, inter alia, held as under: 


“The executive authority is not the sole judge of what is required for national security or public 
order. But the court cannot substitute its decision if the executive authority or the appropriate 
authority acts on proper materials and reasonably and rationally comes to that conclusion even 
though a conclusion with which the court might not be in agreement. It is not for the court to put 
itself in the position of the detaining authority and to satisfy itself that untested facts reveal a path 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 47 


of crime provided these facts are relevant. See in this connection the observations of O. Chinnappa 
Reddy, J. in Vijay Narain Singh case [(1984) 3 SCC 14: 1984 SCC (Cri) 361: AIR 1984 SC 1334: 
(1984) 3 SCR 435 ] at p. 440 and 441. (SCC p. 19, para 1) 346. Similarly, in the case of Union of 
India vs. Rajasthan High Court, (2017) 2 SCC 599: 2016 SCC Online SC 1468. It was not for the 
court in the exercise of its power of judicial review to suggest a policy which it considered fit. The 
formulation of suggestions by the High Court for framing a National Security Policy travelled far 
beyond legitimate domain of judicial review. Formulation of such a policy is based on information 
and inputs which are not available to the court. The court is not an expert in such matters. Judicial 
review is concerned with the legality of executive action and the court can interfere only where 
there is a breach of law or a violation of the Constitution.” 


The Id. Addl. SG has also placed reliance upon the judgment delivered in Ex-Armymen's Protection 
Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2014) 5 SCC 409, wherein it has been inter alia held as under: 


“15. It is difficult to define in exact terms as to what is “national security”. However, the same 
would generally include socio-political stability, territorial integrity, economic solidarity and 
strength, ecological balance, cultural cohesiveness, external peace, etc. 


16. What is in the interest of national security is not a question of law. It is a matter of policy. 
It is not for the court to decide whether something is in the interest of the State or not. It should 
be left to the executive.” 


133. The Id. Addl. SG submitted that the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder provide for a 
mechanism to claim privilege and withhold certain facts/documents to seek non-disclosure of the same. 
The Id. Addl. SG then placed reliance on the judgment delivered in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra), 
wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under: 


"19. ...the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the Act itself permits the Central 
Government to withhold the disclosure of acts which it considers to be against the public 
interest to disclose. Similarly, Rule 3(2) and the proviso to Rule 5 of the Unlawful Activities 
(Prevention) Rules, 1968 also permit non-disclosure of confidential documents and information 
which the Government considers against the public interest to disclose... 


20... 


21. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine 
in nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such 
information, and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. 
The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder 
provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. 


22....in such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such information to the 
association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non-disclosure to the 
association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of adjudication as required by 
the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the 
information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the same. In such a situation, the 
Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself examine and test the credibility 
of such material before it decides to accept the same for determining the existence of sufficient 
cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The materials need not be confined only to 
legal evidence in the strict sense. 


23... 


24. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its 
source, in public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the 
confidential information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the 
conflicting evidence of the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum 


48 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process 
which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action taken." 


134. The Id. Addl. SG also relied on the judgment delivered in People’s Union for Civil Liberties 
vs. Union of India, (2004) 2 SCC 476, where it was, inter alia, held as under: 


“69. The legislative policy behind the aforementioned provisions is no longer res integra. The 
State must have the prerogative of preventing evidence being given on matters that would be 
contrary to public interest. 


70. For determining a question when a claim of privilege is made, the Court is required to pose 
the following questions: 


(1) whether the document in respect of which privilege is claimed, is really a document 
(unpublished) relating to any affairs of State; and 


(2) whether disclosure of the contents of the document would be against public interest? 


71. When any claim of privilege is made by the State in respect of any document, the question 
whether the document belongs to the privileged class has first to be decided by the court. The 
court cannot hold an enquiry into the possible injury to public interest which may result from 
the disclosure of the document in question. The claim of immunity and privilege has to be based 
on public interest. 


72. The section does not say who is to decide the preliminary question viz. whether the 
document is one that relates to any affairs of State, or how it is to be decided, but the clue in 
respect thereof can be found in Section 162. Under Section 162 a person summoned to produce 
a document is bound to bring it to the court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be 
to its production or to its admissibility. The validity of any such objection shall be decided on 
by the courtl. It further says that: The court, if it deems fit, may inspect the document, unless it 
refers to matters of State, or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility 


73. In order to claim immunity from disclosure of unpublished State documents, the documents 
must relate to affairs of the State and disclosure thereof must be against interest of the State or 
public interest.” 


135. The Id. Addl. SG, thus, submitted that from a bare reading of the aforesaid judgment of the 
Supreme Court, it is clear that an enquiry contemplated under the UA(P)A gives a right to the 
Government to claim privilege of sensitive documents in public interest/national interest, which right 
has been duly upheld by the Supreme Court; and that in the present case, the documents for which claim 
of privilege, by their very nature, are confidential and sensitive in nature and, therefore, cannot be 
supplied as a public document. 


136. The ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the documents form a part of the evidence collected by 
the intelligence agencies which pertain to secessionist and unlawful activities of the JKNF and those 
associated with it and the said documents are confidential and secret in nature which can be verified by 
the Tribunal only. The Id. Addl. SG further submitted that material placed in the sealed cover by the 
Central Government is in the form of secret information collected over a period by the investigating 
and intelligence agencies, communications between the intelligence agencies, information which may 
lead to further recoveries, discoveries of facts as also unearth conspiracies but the disclosure whereof 
would be clearly detrimental to the larger public interest and the security of the State. The ld. Addl. SG 
submitted that the material filed by the Central Government contains the note then put up to the Cabinet 
Committee on Security along with documents supporting the note and the grounds on which the 
notification was issued besides intelligence inputs and correspondence in relation thereto. 


137. 1.4. Addl. SG further submitted that the sealed cover material is inherently and dehors being a 
part of the evidence of the present proceedings, is of confidential nature, disclosure of which would be 
contrary to the public as also national interest. 


138. Ld. Addl. SG has also placed further reliance in this regard on the following judgments of the 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 49 


Hon'ble Supreme Court: 
(a) S.P. Gupta Vs. Union of India (1981) Supp SCC 87 
(b) Iqbal Singh Marwah Vs. Meenakshi Marwah (2005) 4 SCC 370 


139. Placing reliance on the above, Id. Addl. SG further emphasised that in regard to the claim of 
privilege for non-disclosure of sealed cover documents, the Supreme Court in $.P. Gupta (supra), has 
held as under: 


“73. We have already pointed out that whenever an objection to the disclosure of a document 
under Section 123 is raised, two questions fall for the determination of the court, namely, 
whether the document relates to affairs of State and whether its disclosure would, in the 
particular case before the court, be injurious to public interest. The court in reaching its 
decision on these two questions has to balance two competing aspects of public interest, 
because the document being one relating to affairs of State, its disclosure would cause some 
injury to the interest of the State or the proper functioning of the public service and on the other 
hand if it is not disclosed, the non-disclosure would thwart the administration of justice by 
keeping back from the court a material document. There are two aspects of public interest 
clashing with each other out of which the court has to decide which predominates. The 
approach to this problem is admirably set out in a passage from the judgment of Lord Reid in 
Conway v. Rimmer [(1968) AC 910, 952, 973, 979, 987, 993 : (1968) 1 All ER 874 (HL)] : 


“Tt is universally recognized that there are two kinds of public interest which may clash. 
There is the public interest that harm shall not be done to the nation or the public service 
by disclosure of certain documents, and there is the public interest that the 
administration of justice shall not be frustrated by the withholding of documents which 
must be produced if justice is to be done. There are many cases where the nature of the 
injury which would or might be done to the nation or the public service is of so grave a 
character that no other interest, public or private, can be allowed to prevail over it. With 
regard to such cases it would be proper to say, as Lord Simon did, that to order 
production of the document in question would put the interest of the State in jeopardy. 
But there are many other cases where the possible injury to the public service is much 
less and there one would think that it would be proper to balance the public interests 
involved.” 


140. 1.4. Addl. SG, therefore, submitted that the rigors of S.P Gupta (supra) for claiming privilege 
have to be read in context of the provisions of UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder which provide 
that document, disclosure whereof may not be in the public interest, be not disclosed. She further 
submitted that the UAP Rules, as quoted above, start with a non obstante clause and thus, an inbuilt 
mechanism has been provided under the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder. Accordingly, the 
Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege, forbidding disclosure where the claim of the Government is 
that the disclosure of such documents could affect the safety and sovereignty of the country and where 
the Tribunal also finds that the public interest outweighs the interest of the association/members/office 
bearers. 


141. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the claim of confidentiality has to satisfy the test of character of 
the document and thus, the foundation of immunity from non-disclosure stems from the character of the 
document. 


142. The Id. Addl. SG also submitted that the decisions of the previous Tribunals constituted under 
Section 4 of the UA(P)A, in which the claim of privilege by the Central Government had been allowed 
holding that the same satisfied the requirement of Section 123 of the Evidence Act, are binding on this 
Tribunal in view of the provisions of Section 5(7) of the UA(P)A which provide that the proceedings 
before this Tribunal are judicial proceedings and, therefore, reliance has been placed on the 
Extraordinary Gazette Notification bearing no CG-DL-E-27032023-244721 published in PART II— 
Section 3—Sub-section (ii) having No. 1382 dated Monday, March 27, 2023/Chaitra 6, 1945 whereby, 
the Tribunal chaired by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma, Judge, Delhi High Court in exercise 
of the powers conferred by sub-Section (3) of section 4 of the said Act, passed an order on the 21* 


50 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


March, 2023, confirming the declaration made by Central Government declaring the Popular Front of 
India (PFI) and its associates or affiliates or fronts including Rehab India Foundation (RIF), Campus 
Front of India (CFD), All India Imams Council (AIIC), National Confederation of Human Rights 
Organization (NCHRO), National Women‘s Front, Junior Front, Empower India Foundation and 
Rehab Foundation, Kerala as ‘unlawful associations’ by upholding the notification no. 8.00. 4559 (०), 
dated the 27th September, 20220 the GOI issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, published in the 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, dt. 2870 Sept., 2022. 


143. या view of the aforesaid highlighted legal position, the ld. Addl. SG submitted that the Central 
Government respectfully claims privilege on the documents contained in the sealed cover, as mentioned 
in the affidavit filed by the concerned witness from the MHA who deposed on behalf of the Central 
Government/ UOI. 


144. ‘Thereafter, as a precursor to the submissions on the existence of ‘sufficient grounds’ for banning 
JKNF as an unlawful association, Id. Addl. SG underscored the reasons for the enactment of the UA(P) 
Act, 1967. Ld. Addl. SG highlighted that the statement of objects and reasons of the UA(P)A itself 
underlines the purpose of its enactment which is to provide for the more effective prevention of certain 
unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for matters connected therewith. She submitted 
that the statute empowers the Parliament to impose by a due process of law reasonable restrictions in 
the interest of sovereignty and integrity of India on the right to form an association, freedom of speech 
and expression, and on right to assemble peacefully and with arms. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that further, 
section 48 of the UA(P)A itself provides that the provisions of the UA(P)A and the Rules made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any 
enactment other than this Act or any instrument having effect by virtue of an enactment other than this 
Act, giving it a clear over-riding position. She submitted that the validity of the provisions of the Act 
ought to be judged in the backdrop of the history of the Act necessitating their introduction. Ld. Addl. 
SG submitted that the Unlawful Activities (Preventive) Act, 1963 was enacted to make powers available 
for dealing with activities directed against the integrity and sovereignty of India which may take the 
manner and form either of “terrorism” or “other unlawful activity” which threatens the sovereignty of 
India. 


145. 1.4. Addl. SG further submitted that the exception to the freedom of speech and expression, and 
to form associations and union, under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India, was inserted in the form 
of “sovereignty and integrity of India” in Article 19(2) and 19(4), after the National Integration Council 
appointed a Committee on National Integration and Regionalization. The said Committee was to look 
into the aspect of putting reasonable restrictions in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. 
Ld. Addl. SG submitted that pursuant to the acceptance of recommendations of the Committee, the 
Constitutional Sixteenth (Amendment) Act 1963 was enacted to impose reasonable restrictions in the 
interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India. Further, to implement the provisions of the 1963 Act, 
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Bill was introduced in the Parliament. The main objective of the 
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is to make powers available for dealing with activities directed 
against the integrity and sovereignty of India. 


146. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that after attaining Independence, Parliament has passed many laws to 
regulate national security in order to protect sovereignty of India. The UA(P)A, 1967 is an Act to 
provide for the more effective prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations 
and for dealing with terrorist activities and other matters connected therewith. 


147. 1.4. Addl. SG further submitted that to achieve the aforesaid purpose of tackling the menace of 
activities inimical to the sovereignty and integrity of India, the legislature in its wisdom decided to 
create two species of the offence i.e. 


a. Unlawful Activity & Unlawful Association [S-2(0) r/w Chapter 2 & 3 (Sections 3-14)]; 
and 


b. Terrorist Act & Terrorist Organization [S-2(k), (1),(m) r/w Chapter 4-6 (Sections 15- 
40)]. 


148. Ld. Addl. SG further submitted that the repeal of the Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act, 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 51 


2002 entailed an absence of a legal framework to address the perils of terrorism. Accordingly, as a 
consequence, the UA(P)A was amended to include a definition of the term ‘terrorism’ and to give 
substantive powers to the Indian State to address the same. The amendments made therein were made 
also keeping in mind India's commitments under the Security Council Resolution dated 287 September, 
2001, which enjoined the Indian state to fight both terrorism as well as terror funding. 


149. In view of the aforesaid, ld. Addl. SG submitted that it is evident that the provisions of UA(P)A 
have been enacted by the Parliament which had the legislative competence to enact the same and that 
once it is clear that the Parliament had the legislative competence to enact the law, there is a presumption 
of constitutionality in favour of the statute. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that an organization can be banned 
solely based on the opinion of the Central Government and, therefore, the challenge to Chapter II of 
UA(P)A has already been repelled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in paras 84 -92 of Arup Bhuyan v. 
State of Assam (2023) 8 SCC 745. In para 90 of this judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as 
under: 


“90. Thus from the aforesaid it can be seen that before any organization is declared unlawful 
a detailed procedure is required to be followed including the wide publicity and even the right 
to a member of such association to represent before the Tribunal. As observed hereinabove the 
notification issued by the Central Government declaring a particular association unlawful, the 
same is subject to inquiry and approval by the Tribunal as per Section 4. Once that is done and 
despite that a person who is a member of such unlawful association continues to be a member 
of such unlawful association then he has to face the consequences and is subjected to the penal 
provisions as provided under Section 10 more particularly Section 10(a)(i) of the UAPA, 
1967.” 


150. 1.4. Addl. SG submitted that from the aforesaid discussion of the Supreme Court, it is clear that 
an organization can be banned solely on the basis of the opinion of the Central Government and through 
the process duly established by the law enacted by the Parliament. 


151. On the aspect of standard of proof required for judging the merits of the present Reference, 
learned Addl. SG submitted that the proceedings before this Tribunal are civil in nature and the standard 
of proof is the standard prescribed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) as 
per which the matter has to be decided by objectively examining which version is more acceptable and 
credible. In this regard, ld. Addl. SG has referred to the observation made in para 30 of Jamaat-e- 
Islami Hind (supra). Ld. Addl. SG also argued that the procedure to be followed by the Tribunals can 
be read from the law enacted under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985. Ld. Addl. SG submitted 
that similarly, the Tribunal established under the UA(P)A has been bestowed with certain powers and 
the procedure to be adopted by it under Section 5 read with Section 9 of the 
said Act. 


152. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that as per the mandate of Section 4 of the UA(P)A, the jurisdiction 
of this Tribunal is to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause available with the Central 
Government to ban the organization in question. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that any procedural 
irregularities or defects in the material adduced before this Tribunal are to be tested by the concerned 
trial court within the parameters of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and other relevant laws. Ld. Addl. 
SG further submitted that the jurisdiction of this Tribunal is to satisfy itself whether these documents 
can be relied upon to ascertain ‘sufficiency of cause’ and whether the agencies responsible for the 
enforcement of law and order could or could not have ignored the same for recommending suitable 
action under the UA(P)A. 


153. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that for the purpose of assessing the sufficiency of the cause, this 
Tribunal has to holistically look into the entire material / incidents and if the material / incidents are 
relatable acts of commission of ‘unlawful activity’, ‘secession’ or ‘cession of a part of the territory of 
India’, on the anvil of preponderance of probability, then the ban is justified and is required to be 
confirmed. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the Central Government has led sufficient and cogent material 
and evidence to demonstrate that there was sufficient material available with the Central Government 
to form an opinion that the JK NF and its associates were indulging in unlawful activities. Ld. Addl. SG 
submitted that the law does not require that the cases which should form the basis of opinion formed by 


52 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


the Central Government should be proximate to the date of the decision or there should be ‘X’ number 
of cases to prove an association to be an unlawful association; and that even one case may be sufficient 
for this assessment. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that the delay in the investigation will have no bearing 
in the present proceedings as the degree of evidence required before this Tribunal and the adjudication 
thereon is to be based on the principles of preponderance of probabilities. 


154. 1.4. Addl. SG has further submitted that the evidence adduced by the Central Government has 
not been refuted on any ground whatsoever, and as such, in view of non-rebuttal of the evidence adduced 
by the Central Government by any member / erstwhile member of JKNF opposing the ban, the 
Notification no. S.O. 1296 (E) published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, dated 12"March, 2024, 
declaring the Jammu and Kashmir National Front (JKNF) as an ‘unlawful association’ under sub- 
Section (1) of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 is liable to be confirmed. 


155. As regards the hostile environment prevailing in the territory of Jammu & Kashmir creating 
hurdles in conclusion of cases against the separatist and militants, the 10. Addl. SG submitted that as 
has been stated in the testimonies of various witnesses, the delay in the investigation and trial has 
occurred due to extremely hostile environment which prevailed in the erstwhile State of Jammu and 
Kashmir. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that it is a matter of public knowledge that since last more than three 
decades, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir has been adversely affected by the acts and deeds 
of the Separatist groups and its leaders. 


156. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that from 1989 to 2016, the situation in the erstwhile State of Jammu 
and Kashmir remained volatile and disturbed due to the circumstances created by terrorist groups 
camouflaged as Separatist Groups/Political Parties or self-styled political leaders who instigated and 
provoked the general public at large against the lawfully established governments with the help of 
foreign state and non-state actors having interests inimical to the interest of the country. Ld. Addl. SG 
has submitted that these facts have been referred to in the concurring opinion of Hon’ble Justice Sanjay 
Kishan Kaul in para-31 and Epilogue recorded in paras 113-135 of the judgment Re: Article 370 of the 
Constitution, reported in 2023 SCC Online SC 1647. 


157. | Ld. Addl. SG submitted that the separatist leaders and their activists had created such terror in 
the minds of public that the general public, which even did not support their cause, feared to oppose 
them or to report to the police against various incidents and even feared to depose or give evidence 
against the said separatist leaders, thus, leading to a non-cooperative atmosphere for the police 
investigating agencies in the cases registered against the said separatist organizations or its leaders. 


158. Ld. Addl. SG also submitted that the investigation was further slowed thereafter due to COVID 
which had brought all the routine activities to a standstill as a complete lockdown in the entire nation 
was imposed. Hence, the investigation in the cases registered against the JKNF in the State of Jammu 
& Kashmir could not be processed at the pace it should have been. 


159. 1.4. Addl. SG has also submitted that the NIA in its charge-sheet filed on 18.01.2018 in RC- 
10/2017/NIA/DLI vide paragraphs 17.5.6 and 17.6.1 and 17.8 has highlighted the magnitude of 
secessionist and terrorist activities in the Kashmir valley and the nexus of JKNF with cross-border 
terrorist organizations in the Kashmir valley for arranging/managing funds for continuing with anti- 
India rhetoric and violent activities in the Jammu & Kashmir. Para 17.5.6 of the charge-sheet shows 
links of Nayeem Khan with militant leaders of Hizbul Mujahideen, a dreaded militant organisation 
known for working towards secession of Jammu & Kashmir from India through violent means, who 
have sought financial assistance from Nayeem Khan. Para 17.6.1 gives details of how funding for 
subversive activities in Jammu & Kashmir is sent across from Pakistan by its agencies and even on the 
nation’s soil by Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi. Para 17.8 reveals how Kashmiri separatist 
leaders including Nayeem Khan facilitate admission of relatives of Kashmiri militants/ex-militants and 
so called freedom fighters in engineering and medical colleges in Pakistan through recommendation 
letters, and in the process perpetuate the secessionist agenda. The investigation carried out by the NIA, 
therefore, corroborates the hostile environment in the State of Jammu and Kashmir which for a long 
period of time which did not let the Investigating Agency to complete the investigations in respective 
FIRs. 


160. The ld. Addl. SG submitted that from a bare perusal of the facts stated in the NIA charge-sheet 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 53 


and the facts stated in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Re: Article 370 of the Constitution(supra), 
it can be clearly inferred that prior to coming into force of the Jammu & Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 
2019, the various successive governments / authorities from 2004 to 2019, for the reasons recorded in 
the judgment of the Supreme Court, did not take any stern action against the separatists and rather than 
concentrating on prosecuting the criminal acts of separatist and secessionist forces, indulged in dialogue 
with separatists. 


161. Ld. Addl. SG submitted that despite several FIRs having been lodged against the members of 
the JKNF, its activists / sympathizers are still active and are indulging in unlawful/anti-national 
activities as defined in the UA(P)A, posing a serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of India, 
communal harmony, and internal security. Ld. Addl. SG has submitted that if the JKNF is not banned, 
the activists and sympathizers of JKNF will again pose a serious threat to the communal harmony, 
internal security and integrity of the country. 


162. Lastly, learned Addl. SG has submitted that the Notification no. 5.0. 1296 (E), dated March12" 
March 2024, issued by the Central Government declaring the JKNF as an unlawful association is based 
on the information and material received from the State Government of Jammu and Kashmir, the 
National Investigation Agency, and the various intelligence agencies, with regard to the unlawful 
activities of JKNF and is liable to be confirmed. 


IX. ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSION 


163. The arguments addressed on behalf of Union of India regarding the existence of ‘sufficient 
grounds’ for declaring JKNF as an unlawful association also included submissions for claiming 
privilege in respect of the documents submitted in a sealed cover by one of the witnesses. The claim for 
privilege in regard to those documents has a significant bearing on the requirement of existence of 
‘sufficient grounds’ since it has been argued that those documents contain extremely sensitive 
information regarding the unlawful and secessionist activities of JKNF. Hence, it will be apposite to 
first rule on the claim for privilege raised by the Union of India. The issue regarding privilege claimed 
by the Central Government in respect of the documents disclosure whereof is injurious to public interest, 
is specifically envisaged in the UA(P) Rules, 1968. Rule 3 of the said UA(P) Rules is in the following 
terms: 


“3. Tribunal and District Judge to follow rules of evidence.—(1) In holding an enquiry under 
sub-section (3) of Section 4 or disposing of any application under sub-section (4) of Section 
7 or sub-section (8) of Section 8, the Tribunal or the District Judge, as the case may be, shall, 
subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2), follow, as far as practicable, the rules of evidence 
laid down in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). 


(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), 
where any books of account or other documents have been produced before the Tribunal or 
the Court of the District Judge by the Central Government and such books of account or other 
documents are claimed by that Government to be a confidential nature then, the Tribunal or 
the Court of the District Judge, as the case may be, shall not, -- 


(a) make such books of account or other documents a part of the records of the proceedings 
before it; or 


(b) allow inspection of, or grant a copy of, the whole of or any extract from, such books of 
account or other documents by or to any person other than a party to the proceedings 
before it.” 


164. It can be seen that the Rule 3 (2) starts with a non-obstante clause providing that 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, where any books of account or 
other documents are sought to be produced by the Central Government and these documents are claimed 
to be of a confidential nature, then the Tribunal shall not make such documents a part of the records of 
the proceedings before it or allow inspection of or grant a copy of the same to any person other than the 
parties to the proceedings before it. 


165. Rule 5 of the UA(P) Rules, which provides for the documents which should accompany a 


54 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


reference to the Tribunal viz. a copy of the notification and all facts on which grounds specified in the 
notification are based, further provides that nothing in the said Rule shall require the Central 
Government to disclose any fact to the Tribunal which it considers against public interest to disclose. 
The said rule is in the following terms: 


“5. Documents which should accompany a reference to the Tribunal. — Every reference 
made to the Tribunal under sub-section (1) of Section 4 shall be accompanied by — 


(i) acopy of the notification made under sub-section (1) of Section 3, and 
(ii) all the facts on which the grounds specified in the said notification are based: 


Provided that nothing in this rule shall require the Central Government to disclose any 
fact to the Tribunal which that Government considers against the public interest to disclose.” 


166. The aforementioned provisions and the requirement of maintaining confidentiality of certain 
documents specifically came to be considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami 
Hind(supra)wherein it was held as under: 


“22. It is obvious that the unlawful activities of an association may quite often be clandestine 
in nature and, therefore, the source of evidence of the unlawful activities may require continued 
confidentiality in public interest. In such a situation, disclosure of the source of such 
information, and, may be, also full particulars thereof, is likely to be against the public interest. 
The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed thereunder 
provide for maintenance of confidentiality, whenever required in public interest. However, the 
non-disclosure of sensitive information and evidence to the association and its office-bearers, 
whenever justified in public interest, does not necessarily imply its non-disclosure to the 
Tribunal as well. In such cases where the Tribunal is satisfied that non-disclosure of such 
information to the association or its office-bearers is in public interest, it may permit its non- 
disclosure to the association or its office-bearers, but in order to perform its task of 
adjudication as required by the Act, the Tribunal can look into the same for the purpose of 
assessing the credibility of the information and satisfying itself that it can safely act on the 
same. In such a situation, the Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure whereby it can itself 
examine and test the credibility of such material before it decides to accept the same for 
determining the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The 
materials need not be confined only to legal evidence in the strict sense. Such a procedure 
would ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is an adjudication made on the points in 
controversy after assessing the credibility of the material it has chosen to accept, without 
abdicating its function by merely acting on the ipse dixit of the Central Government. Such a 
course would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice tailored to suit the 
circumstances of each case, while protecting the rights of the association and its members, 
without jeopardising the public interest. This would also ensure that the process of adjudication 
is not denuded of its content and the decision ultimately rendered by the Tribunal is reached by 
it on all points in controversy after adjudication and not by mere acceptance of the opinion 
already formed by the Central Government. 


23. In John J. Morrissey and G. Donald Booher v. Lou B. Brewer the United States Supreme 
Court, in a case of parole revocation, indicated the minimum requirements to be followed, as 
under: (L Ed pp. 498-99) 


“Our task is limited to deciding the minimum requirements of due process. They 
include (a) written notice of the claimed violations of parole; (b) disclosure to the 
parolee of evidence against him; (c) opportunity to be heard in person and to present 
witnesses and documentary evidence; (d) the right to confront and cross-examine 
adverse witnesses (unless the hearing officer specifically finds good cause for not 
allowing confrontation); (e) a ‘neutral and detached’ hearing body such as a 
traditional parole board, members of which need not be judicial officers or lawyers; 
and (f) a written statement by the factfinders as to the evidence relied on and reasons 
for revoking parole. We emphasise there is no thought to equate this second stage of 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 55 


parole revocation to a criminal prosecution in any sense. It is a narrow inquiry; the 
process should be flexible enough to consider evidence including letters, affidavits, and 
other material that would not be admissible in an adversary criminal trial.” 


24. In Paul Ivan Birzon v. Edward S. King placing reliance on Morrissey, while dealing with a 
similar situation, when confidential information had to be acted on, it was indicated that the 
credibility issue could be resolved by the Board retaining confidentiality of the information but 
assessing the credibility itself, and a modified procedure was indicated as under: 


“.. the board was required to decide whether it would believe the informants or the 
parolee and his witnesses. The infirmity that we see in the hearing and determination 
by the parole board is that it resolved the credibility issue solely on the basis of the 
State report, without itself taking the statements from the informants. Thus the board 
had no way of knowing how reliable the informants were and had no real basis on 
which to resolve the credibility issue against the parolee... 


We do not mean to intimate that the board should have taken testimony from the 
informants at the hearing and given the parolee the opportunity to cross-examine. What 
we do mean is that the board should have received the information directly from the 
informants (although not necessarily in the presence of the parolee), instead of relying 
solely on the State report. The board could then have reached its own conclusions about 
the relative reliability of the informants' statements and those of the parolee and his 
witnesses. 


Similarly, the board could then have made its own decision about how realistic were 
the claims of potential danger to the informants or to State parole officers if their 
identity was disclosed, instead of placing exclusive reliance on the State report. Thus, 
we hold that, in relying exclusively on the written synopsis in the State report, which 
was the only evidence of a parole violation, in the face of the parolee's denial and his 
presentation of the testimony of other witnesses, the revocation of Satz's parole was 
fundamentally unfair to him and was a denial of due process of law.”’ 


25. Such a modified procedure while ensuring confidentiality of such information and its 
source, in public interest, also enables the adjudicating authority to test the credibility of the 
confidential information for the purpose of deciding whether it has to be preferred to the 
conflicting evidence of the other side. This modified procedure satisfies the minimum 
requirements of natural justice and also retains the basic element of an adjudicatory process 
which involves objective determination of the factual basis of the action taken. 


26. An authorised restriction saved by Article 19(4)on the freedom conferred by 
Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution has to be reasonable. In this statute, provision is made for 
the notification to become effective on its confirmation by a Tribunal constituted by a sitting 
High Court Judge, on adjudication, after a show-cause notice to the association, that sufficient 
cause exists for declaring it to be unlawful. The provision for adjudication by judicial scrutiny, 
after a show-cause notice, of existence of sufficient cause to justify the declaration must 
necessarily imply and import into the inquiry, the minimum requirement of natural justice to 
ensure that the decision of the Tribunal is its own opinion, formed on the entire available 
material, and not a mere imprimatur of the Tribunal affixed to the opinion of the Central 
Government. Judicial scrutiny implies a fair procedure to prevent the vitiating element of 
arbitrariness. What is the fair procedure in a given case would depend on the materials 
constituting the factual foundation of the notification and the manner in which the Tribunal can 
assess its true worth. This has to be determined by the Tribunal keeping in view the nature of 
its scrutiny, the minimum requirement of natural justice, the fact that the materials in such 
matters are not confined to legal evidence in the strict sense, and that the scrutiny is not a 
criminal trial. The Tribunal should form its opinion on all the points in controversy after 
assessing for itself the credibility of the material relating to it, even though it may not be 
disclosed to the association, if the public interest so requires. 


56 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


167. 


27. It follows that, ordinarily, the material on which the Tribunal can place reliance for 
deciding the existence of sufficient cause to support the declaration, must be of the kind which 
is capable of judicial scrutiny. In this context, the claim of privilege on the ground of public 
interest by the Central Government would be permissible and the Tribunal is empowered to 
devise a procedure by which it can satisfy itself of the credibility of the material without 
disclosing the same to the association, when public interest so requires. The requirements of 
natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal to examine the material itself in the 
manner it considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same to the 
association. This modified procedure would satisfy the minimum requirement of natural justice 
and judicial scrutiny. The decision would then be that of the Tribunal itself.” 


The High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Deendar Anjuman v. Government of India, 2001 SCC 


OnLine AP 663 after applying the test laid down in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) upheld the ban 
imposed and further held that the entire material available on record itself need not be published or 
made available to the aggrieved person but what is required is disclosure of reasons and the grounds. 
Relevant extract of the said judgment is as under: 


“19. The expression “for reasons to be stated in writing” did not necessarily mean that the entire 
material available on record itself is to be published or made available to the aggrieved person. 
What is required is disclosure of reasons. The grounds must be disclosed. The notification issued 
under sub-section (1) of Section 3 alone is required to be referred to the Tribunal “for the purpose 
of adjudicating whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association unlawful.” 
The Tribunal after such reference is required to issue notice to the affected association to show 
cause, why the association should not be declared unlawful. The Tribunal is required to hold an 
enquiry in the manner specified in Section 9 and after calling for such further information as it 
may consider necessary from the Central Government or from the association and then decide 
whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association to be unlawful. The Tribunal 
is required “to adjudicate whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association 
unlawful.” As held by the Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind v. Union of India the Tribunal 
is required to weigh the material on which the notification under sub-section (1) of Sec. 3 is 
issued by the Central Government after taking into account the cause shown by the Association 
in reply to the notice issued to it and by taking into consideration such further information which 
it may call for, to decide the existence of sufficient cause for declaring the action to be unlawful. 
The Tribunal is required to objectively determine the points in controversy. The Supreme Court 
further held that subject to non-disclosure of information which the Central Government 
considers to be against the public interest to disclose, all information and evidence relied on by 
the Central Government to support the declaration made by it of an association to be unlawful, 
has to be disclosed to the association to enable it to show cause against the same. The Tribunal 
is entitled to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence relating to the points in controversy. 
It is observed by the Supreme Court: 


“To satisfy the minimum requirements of a proper adjudication, it is necessary that the 
Tribunal should have the means to ascertain the credibility of conflicting evidence 
relating to the points in controversy. Unless such a means is available to the Tribunal 
to determine the credibility of the material before it, it cannot choose between 
conflicting material and decide which one to prefer and accept. In such a situation, the 
only option to it would be to accept the opinion of the Central Government, without 
any means to test the credibility of the material on which it is based. The adjudication 
made would cease to be an objective determination and be meaningless, equating the 
process with mere acceptance of the ipse dixit of the Central Government. The 
requirement of adjudication by the Tribunal contemplated under the Act does not 
permit abdication of its function by the Tribunal to the Central Government providing 
merely its stamp of approval to the opinion of the Central Government. The procedure 
to be followed by the Tribunal must, therefore, be such which enables the Tribunal to 
itself assess the credibility of conflicting material on any point in controversy and 
evolve a process by which it can decide whether to accept the version of the Central 
Government or to reject it in the light of the other view asserted by the association. The 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 57 


difficulty in this sphere is likely to arise in relation to the evidence of material in respect 
of which the Central Government claims non-disclosure on the ground of public 
interest.” 


20. It is, therefore, evident that disclosure of all the facts and material available on record subject 
to the claim of any privilege in this regard by the Central Government is only after the reference 
of the notification issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal for the 
purpose of adjudication whether or not there is sufficient cause for declaring the association 
unlawful. The material available on record may have to be revealed to the association or its 
members. In a case wherever any privilege is claimed, the Tribunal has to examine the material 
itself in the manner it considers appropriate, to assess its credibility without disclosing the same 
to the association. Therefore, there is no requirement to disclose the material itself and publish 
the same in the notification or provide to the association along with the notification issued in 
exercise of the power under proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 declaring the association to 
be unlawful with immediate effect. The requirement is disclosure of additional reasons and 
grounds and not the material. The notification issued in exercise of the power under proviso to 
sub-sec. (3) of Section 3 cannot be set aside on the ground that the material relied upon for 
Stating the reasons is not communicated to the association concerned declaring it to be an 
unlawful association with immediate effect. Such notification would become vulnerable only 
when the reasons are not notified: The record should contain the reasons in writing and the same 
is required to be revealed and published in the notification or communicated to the association 
concerned. Such reasons are required to be distinct and different and cannot be the same for 
imposing ban under Section 3 of the Act. The reasons are required to be communicated but not 
the entire material. Disclosure of the material is only after reference of the notification issued 
under Section 3 of the Act to the Tribunal.” 


168. The legal position which thus emerges, can be succinctly put in the following terms: 


a. The scheme of the Act and the procedure for inquiry indicated by the Rules framed 
thereunder contemplates maintenance of confidentiality whenever required in public 
interest; 


b. The Tribunal can look into the confidential material without the same being disclosed 
to the Association or its office-bearers, for the purpose of assessing the credibility of the 
information and satisfying itself that the same is reliable; 


c. The Tribunal can devise a suitable procedure for itself for examining and testing the 
credibility of such material; 


d. The requirement of natural justice can be suitably modified by the Tribunal in the 
manner it considers appropriate for the purpose of assessing/examining the confidential 
material/documents and arriving at a conclusion based on a perusal thereof. 


169. Further, the rigors prescribed by the Supreme Court in the case of $.P. Gupta (supra) have to 
be read in the context of the provisions of the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder. In particular, 
it needs to be borne in mind that Rule 3(1) of the UA(P) Rules, 1968 expressly provides that in holding 
any inquiry under sub-section (3) of section 4 of the UA(P)A, the Tribunal shall follow “as far as 
practicable”, the rules of evidence laid down in the Indian Evidence Act. Thus, the rigors that have been 
contemplated in the context of Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, cannot ipso-facto be made 
applicable to these proceedings. The legislative intent in making the provisions of the Evidence Act 
applicable only “as far as practicable” is evident from the nature of these proceedings. The proceedings 
before this Tribunal do not contemplate a full-fledged trial; rather the proceedings are in the nature of 
an “inquiry” as referred to in Section 4(3). 


170. ‘Further, the Reference proceedings are time-bound and as has been laid down by the Supreme 
Court in the case of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind(supra), an appropriate procedure has to be devised/tailored 
by this Tribunal for the purpose of its inquiry. As such, any claim seeking privilege has to be assessed 
in terms of the in-built mechanism as provided under the UA(P)A and the Rules framed thereunder, and 
the Tribunal is mandated to grant privilege from disclosure where it finds that the disclosure would be 


58 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


against/injurious to public interest. Thus, the nature of the documents has to be assessed by the Tribunal 
to see whether it contains any sensitive information, disclosure of which would be against public 
interest. 


171. On perusal of the documents submitted by the Central Government in a sealed cover, it is found 
that the same contains intelligence reports, secret information collected from time to time by the 
investigating and intelligence agencies, notes/memos prepared by the investigating and intelligence 
agencies, information revealed on investigation including information as to the clandestine nature of 
the activities of the concerned association and its office-bearers and linkage of the association and its 
office-bearers with organizations and individuals outside of India. 


172. This Tribunal finds from the perusal of these documents that the disclosure of these documents 
would be detrimental to the larger public interest and security of the State. One of the documents which 
is contained in the sealed cover, is a note prepared for consideration of the Cabinet Committee on 
Security, which contains sensitive information about activities of the Association and its inimical impact 
on national security. Clearly, the nature of these documents is such that it would be in public interest 
and in the interest of the security of the State to maintain confidentiality in regard thereto. 


173. This Tribunal also notes that the claim for privilege has been expressly stated by the concerned 
witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs (PW-10) to be based on a specific approval/direction of the 
Union Home Secretary (Head of the department). The said position is also borne out from the relevant 
official/noting files shared with this Tribunal. 


174. In the circumstances, this Tribunal allows the claim for privilege in respect of the documents 
submitted in a sealed cover by the concerned witness from the Ministry of Home Affairs. Consequently, 
the Tribunal has proceeded to peruse the said documents, as contemplated in the Judgment of the 
Supreme Court in Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra) and to assess the credibility thereof and the 
implications flowing there from for the purpose of the present inquiry. 


175. On the basis of the material placed on record and the evidence adduced by the Central 
Government, I find sufficient cause for declaring the Jammu and Kashmir National Front (‘JKNF’) as 
an unlawful association which conclusion is drawn for the following reasons. 


176. The notification dated 12March, 2024 issued under Section 3(1) of the Act inter alia mentions 
that (i) the members of the JKNF have been at the fore-front of the secessionist activities in Jammu and 
Kashmir; (ii) the leaders or members of the JKNF have been involved in raising funds through various 
sources including those in Pakistan for promoting unlawful activities, including supporting terrorist 
activities; (tii) JKNF and its members have scant respect towards the constitutional authority and 
constitutional set-up of the country; (iv) JKNF and its leaders or members, have been indulging in 
unlawful activities, which are prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty, security and communal harmony 
of the country; and (v) there are linkages between JKNF with banned terrorist organizations. 


177. |The above grounds/justification cited in the Notification issued under Section 3(1) of the Act 
is borne out from the extensive evidence adduced by the Central Government. The said evidence can 
be broadly categorized into3 categories: 


a. Evidence adduced by officers (senior police officers) from Union Territory of Jammu 
and Kashmir; 


b. Evidence in the form of Charge-sheet filed in NIA case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI; 


c. Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this 
Tribunal. 
Evidence adduced by officers from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 


178. As many as 9 senior police officers/officials from the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir 
(PW1 to PW8’') have deposed as regards the litany of incidents involving JKNF in the past several 
decades. The same clearly brings out that the concerned association has been relentlessly indulging in 


'2 witnesses were examined as PW 7 and PW7A 


[भाग 1--खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 59 


“unlawful activities”. 
179. The incidents with regard to which voluminous evidence has been adduced, inter alia involves: 


a. raising anti-India and pro-Pakistan slogans (evidence of 7७1, PW2, PW3, PW4, PWS, 
PW 6, PW 7, PW 7 A, PW 8), 


b. encouraging boycott of elections and openly professing dis-allegiance towards the 
Constitution of India (evidence of PW1, PW2, PW 3, PW4, PW 5, PW 6, PW 7, PW 
7A, PW 8), 


c. inciting the people of Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting of stones 
on security forces (evidence of PW1, PW2, PW3, PW4, PW5, PW 6, PW 7, PW 7A, 
PW 8), 


व. undermining the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India and professing affection 
towards Pakistan by making hate speeches (evidence of PW1, PW 2, PW 3, PW 4, 
PW5, PW 6, PW 7, PW 7A, PW 8) 


e. instigating the general public intending to cause disaffection against India (evidence of 
PW1, PW 2, PW 3, PW 4, 7४७5, PW 6, PW 7, PW 7A, PW 8), 


f. raising of funds through various illegal sources for promoting unlawful activities, 
including supporting terrorism/ violence/ militancy, spreading secessionist ideology in 
Jammu and Kashmir (evidence of PW 9). 


180. Ona cumulative consideration of the various incidents/activities which are subject matters of 
the various FIRs with regard to which the aforesaid evidence has been led, it is evident that JKNF has 
been indulging in “unlawful activities” and its cadres have posed a grave threat to the law and order 
situation in Jammu and Kashmir since the last 3 - 4 decades. 


181. Although it is true that the investigation in most of the FIRs (with regard to which PW 1 to PW 
8 have deposed) has been protracted, Id. Addl. SG has sought to emphasize that the same was on account 
of hostile environment prevailing in Jammu and Kashmir over a long period of time. However, what is 
of relevance to this Tribunal is the clear pattern that is discernible as regards the nature of activities of 
the concerned association and its office bearers. The pattern of conduct is to incessantly encourage 
secession of the state of Jammu and Kashmir, questioning or seeking to disrupt the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India, inciting the people of Jammu and Kashmir to take resort to violence/pelting 
of stones etc., and to disrupt peace in the region of Jammu and Kashmir. These activities continued 
unabated for a long period of time; and it is only in the last few years (post enactment of the Jammu & 
Kashmir Re-Organisation Act, 2019) that there has been a lull in the anti-national activities in Jammu 
& Kashmir, as is evident from the reduced instances of violence/disruption of law and order. 


182. This Tribunal also takes note of the fact that each of the senior police officers from the state of 
Jammu and Kashmir, who have deposed before this Tribunal, during the course of their examination, 
strenuously emphasized from their own personal knowledge derived during the course of discharge of 
their official functions that JKNF 1.e. its chairmen, and members have been: 


a. incessantly encouraging and advocating claims for secession of Jammu and Kashmir 
from the Union of India and have been inciting the local population towards the same; 


b. promoting anti-national and separatist sentiments prejudicial to the integrity and 
security of the country; 


c. tacitly and tactically supporting militancy and incitement of violence in the territory of 
Jammu and Kashmir on religious lines and have sought to escalate the separatist 
movement; 


183. The compelling testimony of officers from various districts of Jammu and Kashmir cannot be 
disregarded. The aforesaid evidence remains un-rebutted by the JKNF/ its office bearers. At every stage 
of these proceedings, a right was afforded to the JKNF/its members and any other interested party in 
the matter to appear before this Tribunal and cross-examine the concerned officers who have deposed 


60 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—SEC. 3(ii)] 


before this Tribunal. However, the said opportunity has not been availed. 


184. This Tribunal is conscious that the veracity of the contents of the aforesaid charge- 
sheet/s’which have been filed in the above-mentioned criminal cases which have been registered against 
the JKNF and its cadres, is required to be established at the trial of the said cases but the scope of 
scrutiny of the material cited by the Central Government (which is the subject matter of present 
Reference) is not akin to a criminal trial, as has been held in para 26 of Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). 
For the purpose of these proceedings, the evidence adduced is in the nature of relevant material and 
liable to be considered, in terms of the dicta laid down by the Supreme Court in Khatri (supra) and 
Jamaat-e-Islami Hind (supra). As mandated in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Jamaat- 
e-Islami Hind (supra), this Tribunal has examined the material cited by the Central Government for the 
purpose of making an “objective assessment” for the purpose of these proceedings and to assess whether 
the same supports the declaration made under Section 3(1) of UA(P)A vide the notification dated 
12"March 2024. 


Evidence in the form of Charge-sheet filed in NIA case No. RC-10/2017/NIA/DLI 


185. The investigation carried out by NIA on receipt of confidential information that secessionist 
and separatist leaders in Kashmir have been raising funds illegally i.e. through hawala channels, front 
companies and through persons based outside of India i.e. in the middle east, in association with banned 
terrorist organizations based in Pakistan and with the active help of Pakistani agencies, most notably 
the ISI, as also with the support of Pakistan High Commission in New Delhi, for secessionist activities 
is a real eye opener to how these organizations and its cadres are systemically trying to undermine the 
sovereignty of our country. The charge-sheet dt. 18.01.2018 has highlighted in detail the incriminating 
material/evidence dug out by the NIA during the course of its investigation. This includes 
communication between Nayeem Khan and militant leaders of an organization like Hizbul Mujahideen 
seeking funds, video showing participation of Nayeem Khan in a rally in Budgam, Kashmir in which 
ISIS cadre/supporters had also joined (video was downloaded from an open source), video of a sting 
operation conducted by a news channel wherein Nayeem Khan admits to having received funding to 
the extent crores of rupees from Pakistan for causing unrest in Kashmir, recommendation letter issued 
by Nayeem Khan for securing admission in a medical college in Pakistan for a relative of ‘Kashmiri 
freedom fighter’ and blank letter heads of the dangerous militant organisation LeT. Electronic devices 
seized from him by the NIA and other accused individuals were analysed. The investigation conducted 
by the NIA has also brought out that Nayeem Khan was in touch with Pak/POK based militant 
leadership including Syed Salahuddin (Chairman of HM and United Jihad Council) and Hafiz Mohd. 
Saeed (Chief of JuD). Nayeem Khan has been paying tributes to the neutralized militants and, on his 
directions, delegations of his party used to visit family members of the slain terrorists. The charge-sheet 
also brings out in vivid detail the operational structure of APHC which is actually a conglomerate of 
secessionist parties/organizations under the facade of a non-violent political front. The charge-sheet has 
highlighted the role of various Hurriyat leader in a 4 tier structure. At the top of this structure sit SAS 
Geelani, Maulvi Umer Farooq, Asiya Andrabi, Shabir Shah and Yasin Malik who are the chief 
organizers. Below them are the chief strategists which most notably includes Nayeem Khan alongwith 
Altaf Ahmed Shah and Aftab Ahmed Shah. At the 3rd tier are the executors and the 4"tier is of the 
publicity managers. APHC is thus a well-organized and well-oiled secessionist structure in which JKNF 
and its chief protagonist Nayeem Khan plays an important role. The video of the sting operation (taken 
from the concerned news channel itself) buttresses the investigative finding of NIA that Pakistani 
establishment including Pakistan High Commission is actively involved in giving instructions to the 
Kashmiri secessionists and separatists for causing unrest in the valley with the ultimate aim of 
dismembering Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Union. The authenticity of the voice in the video has 
been confirmed by the CFSL to be that of Nayeem Khan. Para 17.9 of the charge-sheet filed by the 
NIA further reveals that Nayeem Khan was in touch with Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali through mobile 
communications. NIA has collected extensive CDR in this regard during investigation. Relevant to 
highlight that Zahoor Ahmed Shah was the biggest hawala operator in Kashmir for the APHC and a 
major source of illegal funding for the APHC and other separatists. The extent of his hawala operations 


 Charge-sheets have been filed in 11 FIRs 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 61 


have been mentioned in detail by the Hon’ble Supreme Court while dismissing his bail application and 
the same are not being reproduced for the sake of brevity i.e. in National Investigation Agency ४9. 
Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali, (2019) 5 SCC 1. 


186. The video grabs from the aforesaid videos of the rally in Budgam, Kashmir where ISIS cadres 
had also joined along with Nayeem Khan, and the sting operation carried out by a news channel, which 
videos have been exhibited by PW 9 in his evidence in a pen drive as Ex. P — 13, are being reproduced 
for ready reference: 


#.17" kh 
TOOAY 


ew re 


ov KHAN! 
>. PRO-ISIS RALLY 


i PTOVINUIAL PRESET 
11191१1%8%]1 (EE LAN 
FOR THE PAST THREE YEARS, 
PAKISTAN HAS BEEN SAYING 
TO DO SOMETHING 


62 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART IH—SEC. 3(ii)] 


WHICH IS WHAT HAD 
HAPPENED FOR FIVE MONTHS 
AFTER BURHAN WANI. 


Oreration 
VILLAINS GF VALLEY 


THE NURRIYAT TAPES 


' INDI 
TODA 
EC) oF ee 
1110111/ | -(| 
YES, IT'S ON. BUT THEY DIDN'T 
WANT IT TO BE THAT STRONG 
THEY WANTED SOMETHING 
POWERFUL FOR A MONTH 
BUT YOU KNOW, MANY OTHER 


tall THINGS ADD UP (IN SUCH 
SITUATIONS 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 


INA 
TODAY 


em 


FPORTER 
yy DID THEY GIVE FINANCIAL 
SUPPORT FOR THIS (UNREST)? 


17811 / KHAN PT yl 
1UIIYAT-GEELANI 

YES. STILL IT DIDN'T MEET 
THE LEVELS | HAD 


ENVISIONED. 


64 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART IH—SEC. 3(ii)] 


ODA 
i TODAY 
IEPORTEL ony rs 
IT (THE PAKISTANI SUPPORT) 
MUST BE IN HUNDREDS Of 
CRORES. 


WATE TA KHAN. PROVINCIA 
(UNHIYAT-GEELANI 
YES. THAT'S A SMALL 
AMOUNT. 


187. This Tribunal has also gone through the statements of the protected witnesses. The facts 
disclosed are disquieting in so far as the funding modus operandi of JKNF and other secessionist leaders 
are concerned. The statements reveal that under the garb of giving recommendation letters to the 
relatives of Kashmiri militants/ex-militants for admission in medical and engineering colleges in 
Pakistan, Nayeem Khan would charge between 18 — 20 lakhs for recommending admission in an MBBS 
degree course and 8 — 12 lakhs for admission in a BDS course. These funds would then be diverted for 
organizing hartals, stone pelting incidents and other unlawful demonstrations. On an average, 
recommendation letters were given to about 150-200 Kashmir students annually. One can well gauge 
the amount of illegal funds which must have been generated by JKNF through this mode. Still further, 
the statements of protected witnesses also reveals that Pakistan’s ISI, Pakistan High Commission in 
India and the separatists act like the vertices of a triangle, entrapping the gullible Kashmiri youth in 
particular and the Kashmiri population in general, pulling them into a vortex of illegality and 
unlawfulness from where they find it very difficult to extricate themselves and their families. Witnesses 
have also disclosed that Nayeem Khan and other Hurriyat leaders take pictures of injured Kashmiri 
youth i.e. those who have been injured by the security forces during illegal and violent demonstrations 
and those photographs along with detailed list of injured persons are then sent to Pakistan to impress 


[भाग 1---खण्ड 3(ii)] भारत का राजपत्र : असाधारण 65 


upon them about the Kashmiri independence movement. In return, more funds are then sought from the 
Pakistani establishment to continue with anti-India acts. The statements of protected witnesses thus 
further confirms that Nayeem Khan is an integral part of the APHC, and has been very active in 
encouraging and exhorting the APHC workers and supporters for indulging in anti-India activities such 
as hartals, destruction of public property, stone pelting and such other activities with the sole aim of 
cutting off Kashmir from the Indian mainstream which acts directly affect the sovereignty of India. 


Evidence in the form of documents/material submitted in a sealed cover before this Tribunal 


188. As noted hereinabove, the documents submitted by the witness (PW 10) who has deposed on 
behalf of the Central Government, inter alia, includes reports of intelligence agencies and the note 
prepared for the Cabinet Committee on Security setting out the entire background of JKNF and its 
activities, based on the information collated by the intelligence agencies and also bringing out linkage 
of JKNF with cross-border agencies/establishments, and finally from inputs received from the Criminal 
Investigation Department, Jammu and Kashmir (Srinagar). 


189. A perusal of the said documents has brought out in vivid detail the terrorist and secessionist 
activities of JKNF in close coordination with inimical elements in Pakistan. The systemic and 
systematic attempts to promote secession of Jammu and Kashmir from the territory of India, to 
undermine the sovereignty of India, to incite the local populace and to promote violence have been 
brought out in the said material/documents. 


CONCLUSION 


190. From the elaborate material/evidence placed on record in these proceedings, this Tribunal finds 
that there is ample justification to uphold the ban on the JKNF and as a corollary, upholds the declaration 
of JKNF as being an unlawful association, under the UA(P)A. Moreover, given the nature of activities 
of the JKNF, the Central Government was justified in taking recourse to the proviso to Section 3 (3) of 
the UA(P)A. As noticed hereinabove, the activities of the concerned association have had a toxic effect 
on maintenance of law and order in the region of Jammu and Kashmir over the last several decades. 
The measure of stability that has come about after 2019 (as is evident from the reduced number of law 
& order incidents) cannot be allowed to be jeopardized on account of continuing unlawful activities of 
JKNF. 

191. Inthe framework of the Indian Constitution and the UA(P)A, there is no space for an association 
like the JKNF which openly propagates secessionism, avowedly express dis-allegiance to the 
Constitution of India, and undermines the territorial integrity and sovereignty of India. 


192. Thus, this Tribunal having followed the procedure laid down in the Unlawful Activities 
Prevention Act, 1967 and its Rules and having independently and objectively appreciated and evaluated 
the material and evidence on record, is of the firm and considered view that there is sufficient cause for 
declaring the JKNF as an unlawful association under Section 3(1) of the UA(P)A, 1967, vide the 
notification dated 12March 2024. Thus, an order is passed under Section 4 (3) of the UA(P)A, 1967 
confirming the declaration made in the notification bearing no. S.O.1296 (E) published in the official 
gazette on 12"March2024 issued under section 3 (1) of the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1967. 


(JUSTICE NEENA BANSAL KRISHNA) 
UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES (PREVENTION) TRIBUNAL 
September 6", 2024.” 


[F. No. 14017/56/2024-NI-MFO] 
ABHIJIT SINHA, Jt. Secy. 


Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 


SARVESH KUMAR (us 
SRIVASTAVA .. ० 


