रजिस्ट्री सं" डी" Were 


(एन)04/0007/2003---23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23 


The Gazette of Gudia 


Oh. -ST. Wet. -37.-322023-25065] 
CG-DL-E-322023-25065 


असाधारण 
EXTRAORDINARY 
भाग II— खण्ड 2 
PART II — Section 2 
प्राधिकार से प्रकाशित 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 


We 28] नई दिल्‍ली, बुधवार, दिसम्बर 3, 2023/अग्रहायण 22, 945 (शक) 
No. 28] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 3, 2023/AGRAHAYANA 22, 945 (SAKA) 


इस भाग में भिन्‍न पृष्ठ संख्या दी जाती है जिससे कि यह अलग संकलन के रूप में रखा जा सके। 
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation. 


LOK SABHA 


The following Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha on |3th December, 2023:— 
Bitzi No. 59 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 207. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


I. This Act may be called the Central Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Short title. 
Act, 2023. 


2 of 20I7. 2. In section |0 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 207,— Amendment of 
section 0. 


(A) in sub-section (/),— 
(J) in clause (b), after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be 


inserted, namely:— 


"(iii) has been an advocate for ten years with substantial experience 
in litigation in matters relating to indirect taxes in the Appellate Tribunal, 
Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, State Value Added 
Tax Tribunal, by whatever name called, High Court or Supreme Court;"; 


(77) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 


"Provided that a person who has not completed the age of fifty 
years shall not be eligible for appointment as the President or Member."; 


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


(B) in sub-section (9), for the words, "sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier 
and shall be eligible for re-appointment for a period not exceeding two years", the 
words "seventy years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-appointment for 
a period not exceeding two years subject to the age-limit specified above" shall be 
substituted; 


(C) in sub-section (/0), for the words, "sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and 
shall be eligible for re-appointment for a period not exceeding two years", the words 
"sixty-seven years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-appointment for a 
period not exceeding two years subject to the age-limit specified above" shall be 
substituted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


Section l09 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 207 (2 of 207) provides for 
Constitution of Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunal, which is the second appellate 
authority within the Goods and Services Tax framework for hearing appeals against the 
orders passed by the Appellate Authority under the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act, 20l7 and the State Goods and Services Tax Acts. Non-constitution of the Goods and 
Services Tax Appellate Tribunals is denying the taxpayers of second appellate remedy and 
consequently the taxpayers are seeking relief directly from the High Court, thereby burdening 
the High Courts. 


2. The amendments to sections !09 and !0 of the Central Goods and Services Tax 
Act, 207 for enabling the creation of the Central Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunals 
were notified vide notification No. 28/2023-Central Tax dated 3Ist July, 2023. During the 
process of operationalisation of the said Tribunal, it was observed that certain provisions of 
the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 20!7 need to be aligned with the Tribunal Reforms 
Act, 202 (33 of 202।). 


3. Accordingly, the provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 207 are 
being aligned with the Tribunal Reforms Act, 202], to initiate the administrative process for 
operationalisation of the Goods and Services Tax Appellate Tribunals at the earliest. 


4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 5th December, 2023. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring 
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


Short title. 


Definition. 


Power of 
Central 
Government 
to make 
declaration. 


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr पी. 


Bitt No. 58 oF 2023 


A Bill to provide for the immediate effect for a limited period of provisions in Bills 
relating to the imposition or increase of duties of customs or excise. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 


l. This Act may be called the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 2023. 


2. In this Act, a “declared provision” means a provision in a Bill in respect of which 
a declaration has been made under section 3. 


3. Where a Bill to be introduced in Parliament on behalf of the Government provides 
for the imposition or increase of a duty of customs or excise with or without change in tariff 
classification, the Central Government may cause to be inserted in the Bill a declaration that 
it is expedient in the public interest that any provision of the Bill relating to such imposition 
or increase shall have immediate effect under this Act. 


86 of ]93]. 


98८. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5 


4. (/) Adeclared provision shall have the force of law immediately on the expiry of 
the day on which the Bill containing it is introduced. 


(2) A declared provision shall cease to have the force of law under the provisions of 
this Act— 


(a) when it comes into operation as an enactment, with or without amendment; 


(b) when the Central Government, in pursuance of a motion passed by Parliament, 
directs, by notification in the Official Gazette, that it shall cease to have the force of 
law; or 


(c) if it has not already ceased to have the force of law under clause (a) or clause 
(b), then on the expiry of the seventy-fifth day after the day on which the Bill containing 
it was introduced. 


5. (J) Where a declared provision comes into operation as an enactment in an amended 
form before the expiry of the seventy-fifth day after the day on which the Bill containing it 
was introduced, refunds shall be made of all duties collected which would not have been 
collected if the provision adopted in the enactment had been the declared provision: 


Provided that the rate at which refunds of any duty may be made under this sub-section 
shall not exceed the difference between the rate of such duty proposed in the declared 
provision and the rate of such duty in force when the Bill was introduced. 


(2) Where a declared provision ceases to have the force of law under clause (b) or 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 4, refunds shall be made of all duties collected which 
would not have been collected if the declaration in respect of it had not been made. 


6. The Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 93 is hereby repealed. 


Effect of 
declarations 
under this Act, 
and duration 
thereof. 


Refunds to be 
made in 
certain cases. 


Repeal. 


6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 


The Provisional Collection of Taxes Bill, 2023 provides for giving immediate effect for 
a limited period to provisions in Bills relating to the imposition or increase of duties of 
customs or excise, with or without change in tariff classification. The Bill also provides for 
the repeal of the Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 93]. 


2. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN. 
The 5th December, 2023. 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring 
nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7 


BiLt No. 76 oF 2023 


A Bill further to amend the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special 
Provisions) Second Act, 20]. 


BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as 
follows:— 

l. This Act may be called the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Short title. 
Provisions) Second (Amendment) Act, 2023. 


2. In the National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Amendment 
20 of 20II. Act, 20] (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in the long title, for the figures "2023", of long title. 
the figures "2026" shall be substituted. 


Amendment 
of Preamble. 


Amendment 
of section |. 


Amendment 
of section 3. 


8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Parr II— 


3. In the principal Act, in the Preamble,— 
(a) for seventh paragraph, the following paragraphs shall be substituted, 
namely:— 


"AND WHEREAS the Development Control Norms for unauthorised colonies 
as provided in the National Capital Territory of Delhi (Recognition of Property 
Rights of Residents in Unauthorised Colonies) Regulations, 209, have been 
notified on the 8th day of March, 2022; 


AnD Whereas the process of conferring the ownership rights to the 
residents of unauthorised colonies and action as per the Development Control 
Norms for unauthorised colonies is under progress and will take time;"; 


(b) seventeenth paragraph shall be omitted; 


(c) in the last paragraph, for the figures "2023", the figures "2026" shall be 
substituted. 


4. In section | of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), for the figures "2023", the 
figures "2026" shall be substituted. 


5. In section 3 of the principal Act,— 


(a) in sub-section (3), for the figures "2023", the figures "2026" shall be 
substituted; 


(b) in sub-section (4), for the figures "2023", the figures "2026" shall be 
substituted. 


SEc. 2] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9 


The phenomenal growth of the National Capital Territory of Delhi over the last many 
years has led to increase in demand for housing, commercial space and other civic amenities. 
The gap in the demand and supply has resulted in the problems of encroachment on public 
land, growth of slums, unauthorised constructions, etc. 


2. The Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006 was enacted on the !9th May, 2006, 
initially for a period of one year, to protect certain forms of unauthorised developments in 
Delhi from punitive action. This protection to various forms of unauthorised developments 
in Delhi has continued thereafter, through Ordinances and Acts enacted from time to time. 


3. In the year 20, a comprehensive legislation, namely, the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second Act, 20ll, was enacted which was valid for a 
period of three years upto 3lst December, 204. The validity of this Act has been extended 
from time to time with such modification as were necessary and the current validity is upto 
3lst December, 2023. 


4. As per the provisions of the 20l! Act, orderly arrangements had to be made for 
relocation and rehabilitation of slum dwellers and Jhuggi-Jhompri clusters; unauthorised 
colonies, village abadi area (inculding urban villages) and their extensions; farm houses 
involving construction beyond permissible building limits; schools, dispensaries, religious 
and cultural institutions, storages, warehouses and godowns used for agricultural inputs or 
produce (including dairy and poultry) in rural areas built on agricultural land; guidelines for 
redevelopment of existing godown clusters (including those for a storage of non-agricultural 
goods); special areas and policy or plan for orderly arrangement in all other areas of the 
National Capital Territory of Delhi in consonance with the Master Plan on its review. 


5. The National Capital Territory of Delhi (Recognition of Property Rights of 
Residents in Unauthorised Colonies) Act, 209 has been enacted and the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi (Recognition of Property Rights of Residents in Unauthorised Colonies) 
Regulations, 20!9 have been notified on the 29th October, 209 to confer ownership rights to 
the residents of Unauthorised Colonies. The Development Control Norms for these 
unauthorised colonies have been notified on the 8th March, 2022. The Master Plan for Delhi 
with the perspective year 204] is under finalisation wherein the measures for unauthorised 
developments like Jhuggi-Jhompri clusters, unauthorised colonies, etc., are being included. 
The process of dealing with these unauthorised developments will take more time. Therefore, 
there is a need for continuing the protection from punitive action granted to certain forms of 
unauthorised developments in the National Capital Territory of Delhi. 


6. 20I Act is valid upto 3lst December, 2023 and it is necessary to continue the 
protection of those unauthorised developments where adequate measures are yet to be 
taken. 


7. The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Second 
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 seeks to provide extension of the validity of the said Act for a period 
of three years from Ist January, 2024 to 3lst December, 2026. 


8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 


New DELHI; 
The \0th December, 2023. HARDEEP S PURI. 


0 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. 2] 


FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 


The provisions of the Bill do not involve any expenditure, either recurring or 
non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India. 


UTPAL KUMAR SINGH, 


Secretary-General. 


UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI-0002 
AND PUBLISHED B Y THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI-0054. 

Kshitiz 

MGIPMRND—47GI—3-2-2023. Mohan 


